<h2 class="main">Translator’s Note</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">I am greatly indebted to my friend John Sargeaunt for
a number of extremely useful comments and suggestions and to my friend
Stephen McKenna for his version of the <i>Hymn to Aphrodite</i> in
<a href="#ch7" class="pginternal">Chapter VII</a>. and for assistance in the translation
generally.</p>
<p class="signed"><span class="sc">A. T. de M.</span></p>
<p class="dateline"><span class="sc">Crowborough</span>, <i>10 July,
1920</i>. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb1" id="pb1" class="pginternal">1</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="body">
<div class="div1" id="ch1"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="super" id="xd20e220">The Tour</h2>
<h2 class="main">Chapter I</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">The night that hung over the sea was windless and
blissfully silver-pure after the glowing splendour of the day; and the
great quadrireme glided evenly and softly, as though upon a lake, under
a wide firmament of stars. The thin horizon was purely outlined around
the oval sea; and on this wide world there was nothing but the stars
and the ship.</p>
<p>But the ship resounded with music. There was the constantly repeated
melodious phrase of the three hundred rowers, soft and monotone, in a
melancholy minor, with ever the same refrain, after which the boatswain
gave out the chant, after which the chorus of rowers again threw back
their long, hushed phrase of melancholy, the soft, monotonous
accompaniment of the wearying work, the musical encouragement to repeat
the same movement of the arms and the same bending of the body over the
loins.</p>
<p>This music rose in a mournful swell from the ship’s lower deck
and harmonizing with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb2" id="pb2" class="pginternal">2</a>]</span>it was the soft stroke of the oars, which were
like the legs of some graceful sea-animal; the ship herself, with her
swanlike raised prow, suggested an elegant monster swimming through the
lake-calm waters of that silvery night-world, a monster with a
swan’s neck and hundreds of slender, evenly-moving legs and
winged with two rose-yellow sails, which rose and bellied gently at the
ship’s own motion, but did not swell, because the wind lay
still.</p>
<p>While the great, winged navigium glided upon that harmony of
slaves’ song and oar-strokes, there came from the rear half-deck
the blither song of the sailors idling after their work. It sounded
cheerful with deep, bass male voices, without the rowers’
melancholy; and there was one sailor who gave the time in a higher
voice, for the seamen were at liberty to sing, but their singing must
be artistically led, because melodious music meant a prosperous voyage
and averted evil chances and did not let the shrill voices of the
sirens ring from under the waters and because the pure sound of the
human voice kept away the rocks drifting under the sea and compelled
the sea-serpent to dive back into the deep. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb3" id="pb3" class="pginternal">3</a>]</span></p>
<p>And through these two choirs, through the melancholy singing of the
rowers and the jubilant seamen’s song, a delicate female voice
let fall clear, love-yearning notes, always with a playful and wanton
final phrase. It was—while as it were golden beads tinkled from
twanged harp-strings: those very bright gold beads which tinkle from
the strings of the little four-stringed Lesbian harp—a hymn to
the goddess Aphrodite, whose name constantly rang back, plaintively and
wantonly, in the singer’s Greek, exotically soft against the
harder Latin of the men’s joy-song and the melodious melancholy
phrase of the lower deck....</p>
<p>Publius Lucius Sabinus lay on the prow in a pavilion of Tyrian
red-silk curtains and listened. The music sounding up from his ship in
the silver-pure, windless night, through the blissful, wide-pure,
star-strewn air, brought him a moment’s respite from grief. He
lay calmer now, sated with despair, with his soul of sorrow as it were
bathed in the melodious music. He stared, as though without thinking,
now almost free from grief, at the silver statue of Aphrodite, the
patroness of his ship, in front of which an alabaster lamp burned,
while a light <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb4" id="pb4" class="pginternal">4</a>]</span>spiral of nard curled around the goddess’ feet
from an incense-boat.</p>
<p>It was not possible to feel always, always, the same vehement grief.
To-morrow, nay, in an hour, the sorrow would resume its violence; now,
in this night of coolness and melody, there was just a brief rest, a
moment of annihilation, almost a sense of wistful well-being. And, in
this calmer mood, Lucius felt a need to speak a friendly word to his
old friend and tutor, as he had not done since the voyage began.</p>
<p>He struck the gong beside his couch; and a little black slave
appeared.</p>
<p>“Tarrar,” said Lucius, “find Thrasyllus for me and
tell him that I await him.”</p>
<p>The little Libyan slave, looking like a monkey in his scanty,
many-coloured coat, made a drolly serious movement of reverence, crept
backwards and disappeared. It was not long before he lifted the hanging
and Thrasyllus stepped into the presence of his young master, Publius
Lucius Sabinus.</p>
<p>The pedagogue, or tutor, was an elderly freedman, tall, lean,
serious, grey-haired and grey-bearded. His eyes were kindly; his mouth
wore a fatherly smile. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb5" id="pb5" class="pginternal">5</a>]</span></p>
<p>Lucius, without rising, stretched out his hand to him:</p>
<p>“Thrasyllus,” he said, “forgive me if I have been
unkind.”</p>
<p>This was all that he said. His voice sounded deep, manly and
earnest. The old tutor had taken a seat on a footstool beside his
master’s couch. And, holding the other’s hand for a moment
in his own, he said:</p>
<p>“Lucius, I thank you for that word. But I have nothing to
forgive, dear young master. You are the master, I am your slave, your
slave still, even though you have given me my freedom. I am your
servant, but one who has fatherly feelings for you. I feel a
father’s love towards you; and you have never forbidden it. It is
well; and I am content. I serve you and I love you. But I thank you for
that generous word. That is what you are: generous, just. You are far
above all pride. You know how to admit when you are wrong. And I, on my
side, if you think that you need it, gladly grant you my forgiveness,
though the word is unsuited to my mouth. You were bitter and you were
suffering: your sorrow drove you mad. Your nature is violent in
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb6" id="pb6" class="pginternal">6</a>]</span>all things: in your love, in your sorrow, in your
hatred, in all your passions and angers....”</p>
<p>“I was not generous and not just, Thrasyllus, and I raised my
hand against you. Forgive me.”</p>
<p>The old tutor shrugged his shoulders:</p>
<p>“I forgive you, I forgive you. Your blood flows hotly and the
red cloud sometimes blinds you. Certainly you must control and master
yourself. But I, I am your slave, though I feel for you like a father;
and that you raised your hand against me: what of it? It was a movement
of anger. You are as mettlesome as a young colt. And sorrow drove you
mad.”</p>
<p>“It does so still. Sometimes, sometimes it is as though I felt
a fury of frenzy here, inside me, in my breast! Then I <i>must</i> have
her, have her back, have her here, beside me, in my arms, at my breast,
at my lips! O ye gods, ye gods, ye gods!”</p>
<p>He drew a deep breath, moaned and sobbed.</p>
<p>“Be still, dear young master,” said the tutor.
“Try to forget and try to be resigned. She is gone. She is not to
be found. We have searched everywhere. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb7" id="pb7" class="pginternal">7</a>]</span>You have vainly squandered
treasures to find her. Ilia is gone. It is three months now since she
disappeared. She was probably kidnapped by pirates while bathing. She
used often to bathe in the sea, among the rocks....”</p>
<p>“Is the villa at Baiæ sold? I <i>won’t</i> go back
to it!... Since she is no longer there, since she has disappeared,
disappeared! She has disappeared! She has disappeared without a trace!
Just one sandal on the shore. It was a calm sea. She cannot have been
drowned!... In my house she was queen! My Ilia: she was the queen of my
house, though she was a slave! Everything for her and because of her!
She was my slave, but she had slaves herself, male and female: she had
the jewels of an empress, she had the raiment of a goddess! I
worshipped her as I would Venus herself! And she has disappeared, she
has disappeared without a trace, without a trace! Not a thing of hers
has been found save a sandal, a sandal! Where can she be? Is she dead,
is she alive? Did she run away, was she kidnapped, has she been
murdered? Shall I never, never see her again? Here,
here”—he rose suddenly—“here, in my boiling
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb8" id="pb8" class="pginternal">8</a>]</span>breast, I feel it welling up now, the fury of
frenzy! I want her, I will have her! Ilia, Ilia, Ilia!”</p>
<p>And he uttered a despairing cry, a scream of anguish, and burst into
sobs.</p>
<p>His cry, his scream was heard in the night, throughout the ship.</p>
<p>And suddenly, because of his grief, all the music fell silent: the
melancholy chant of the rowers, the joy-song of the sailors and the
hymn to the goddess, sung to the twanging Lesbian harp.</p>
<p>Only the oars continued to beat the waves. For the rest, silence,
silence, silence ... over all the ship, under the starry dome....</p>
<p>Then the boatswain’s voice made itself heard. The
rowers’ melodious phrase rose in a mournful swell, always the
same. And the high voice of the sailor who led the singing set the
time. The seamen took up the chant. And bright, golden beads from the
four-stringed harp fell like clear drops through the night; and the
Greek hymn of the songstress pined away with love and tenderness, to
ring out suddenly, imploringly:</p>
<p>“Aphrodite!... Aphrodite!...” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb9" id="pb9" class="pginternal">9</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch2"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e303">Chapter II</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Lucius lay on his cushions sobbing like a child.
Beside him sat old Thrasyllus, with his hand on his master’s
heaving shoulder:</p>
<p>“Lucius, pray control yourself,” he said. “Master
yourself and yield piously to Fate. Ilia is gone, she is gone. She is
probably gone for ever. She has disappeared. Pirates must have
kidnapped her while she was bathing.... Do not think of her any more.
Life is rich in promise. Fortune has favoured you not only with untold
treasures, but also with genius and soul. You love beauty and study,
every art and every science. You did well to follow my advice at last
and not to go on languishing with grief in the villa at Baiæ.
Yes, it is sold. We shall never go back there. The villa is sold to
Cæsar. For almost nothing. Tiberius can look upon it as a gift!
What does it matter? Forget the villa and ... forget Ilia.... We are
now sailing towards Egypt, the birthplace of all wisdom, the cradle of
humanity. You did well to <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb10" id="pb10" class="pginternal">10</a>]</span>follow my advice: you needed
distraction, my dear young master; and this distraction will bring
healing to your sick soul. To-morrow we shall reach Alexandria. The
voyage is auspicious and will probably be completed without storms. Try
to sleep now; and, once again, thank you for your kind word. You are
generous. I had nothing to forgive, but I am grateful that you love me
better than you would a simple slave. Good-night. Good-night,
Lucius.”</p>
<p>The tutor left the pavilion:</p>
<p>“Draw the curtains close, Tarrar,” he said to the Libyan
boy. “Noiselessly.”</p>
<p>“Yes, Thrasyllus,” said the child.</p>
<p>The tutor walked to the end of the long deck. The sailors’
song was hushed, the hymn was hushed; only the rowers’ melancholy
phrase sounded very softly, muffled in undertone.</p>
<p>The old man stopped. On a pile of cushions lay Catullus,
Lucius’ penniless uncle, pot-bellied as Silenus and with a bald
and shining pate; and on a low chair sat Cora, the Greek slave from
Cos. Her harp stood like a rounded bow by her side; and she leant her
head against it.</p>
<p>“Well, Thrasyllus,” mumbled Catullus, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb11" id="pb11" class="pginternal">11</a>]</span>sleepily, “how goes it with my
nephew?”</p>
<p>“He has spoken a kind word to me,” replied the tutor,
joyfully.</p>
<p>“A kind word?” cried Catullus, raising himself, with his
hands still behind the grey fringe of his cranium. “I shall
become jealous! I have not had a kind word since that wench
bolted....”</p>
<p>“Ssh! Be silent, worthy Catullus,” said Thrasyllus.
“He believes that she has been kidnapped. Leave him in that
belief.”</p>
<p>“And every one knows—the steersman told me so
himself—that she ran away with Carus the Cypriote, the sailor!
Every one knows it, all the sailors and rowers....”</p>
<p>“Ssh!” Thrasyllus repeated. “Never tell him! He
worshipped the woman and she was not worth it! She reigned as queen in
his house ... and she ran away with Carus the Cypriote! She left a
master like Lucius for a scoundrel like Carus!”</p>
<p>“And Lucius still believes that Venus watches over
him!”</p>
<p>“Why should the goddess not watch over him, my Lord Catullus?
Ilia was not worthy of Lucius: the goddess was in very truth watching
over Lucius when she aroused that mad passion in Ilia. Who <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb12" id="pb12" class="pginternal">12</a>]</span>knows
what great and high happiness she has in store for him in the
future?”</p>
<p>“I don’t believe in the gods, Thrasyllus, not even in
Bacchus,” said Catullus. “You know I don’t. Since the
gods ordained that I should be born as poor as a rat and my nephew
surrounded by every earthly treasure, since ... since I was a babe at
the breast, I have not believed in the gods! And least of all in Venus
... though I could almost begin to believe in her when Cora sings to
her as she has been doing.”</p>
<p>The Greek slave raised her head from the harp on which she was
leaning:</p>
<p>“Did I sing well?” she asked. “Thrasyllus, did I
sing well?”</p>
<p>“Very well indeed, Cora,” said Thrasyllus.</p>
<p>“Did <i>he</i> say anything about my song?”</p>
<p>“No,” said Thrasyllus, “he did not.”</p>
<p>“Has he <i>never</i> said anything about my
singing?”</p>
<p>“No, Cora; he is suffering too much to take notice of
it.”</p>
<p>“Poor Cora!” said Catullus. “She has been singing
hymns to Aphrodite for three months now, ever since Ilia went away and
since you, Thrasyllus, bought Cora for her <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb13" id="pb13" class="pginternal">13</a>]</span>beautiful voice, to divert Lucius a little; and I
believe that Lucius has not even observed that Cora can sing ... much
less realized that she exists!”</p>
<p>“It doesn’t matter,” said the Greek slave, leaning
her head against the harp again.</p>
<p>Catullus yawned and puffed out his stomach:</p>
<p>“I shall stay and sleep here in my cushions,” he said.
“I shall not go to my pavilion. I shall stay and sleep here,
under the stars. To-morrow we shall be at Alexandria! Alexandria! The
city with the most exquisite cooking, so they say! I am tired of Rome
and Baiæ; I am really tired of roast peacock and oysters. Nothing
but Rome and roast peacock; nothing but Baiæ and oysters: I shall
end by turning into a peacock or an oyster! Change of diet is the
secret of good health. I was losing my gaiety and had not a joke left
in me to charm an occasional laugh out of Lucius. He did not even
listen to <i>me</i>, Cora, when I was witty ... and you expect him to
listen to your song! He listens to nothing and nobody since Ilia is
gone.”</p>
<p>“Was she so very beautiful?” asked Cora.</p>
<p>“She was very beautiful,” said Thrasyllus, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb14" id="pb14" class="pginternal">14</a>]</span>with
grave appreciation.</p>
<p>“She was beautiful,” Catullus echoed, in airy praise,
“but she was too heavy and too big. Her ankles were not slender.
Her wrists were as thick as a man’s.”</p>
<p>“She was <i>very</i> beautiful,” Thrasyllus repeated.
“She was as beautiful as a goddess.”</p>
<p>“That is just where I never agreed,” cried Catullus,
vehemently, “either with you or with my nephew. You both said
that she was like a goddess....”</p>
<p>“She was like the Cnidian Venus of Praxiteles,”
Thrasyllus persisted.</p>
<p>“I could never see it!” Catullus persisted, in his turn.
“I could never see it. There may have been something of
Praxiteles’ Venus in the lines of her body ... something,
perhaps, though much coarser; but her face certainly lacked the charm,
the smile of that divine statue. Now, though I do not believe in the
gods, though I do not believe in Venus, I do believe in my own correct
and sometimes sober opinion! I was not in love with Ilia as Thrasyllus
and Lucius were! And really, between ourselves, I can understand her
bolting, though she did reign as queen in the house. She <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb15" id="pb15" class="pginternal">15</a>]</span>was far
too much admired for her divine ankles and wrists and for her big feet
and hands! Did she not sometimes have to turn and turn for a hour,
while Lucius lay looking at her, to turn on a revolving pedestal, which
two slaves under the floor moved round and round and round, and did not
Lucius grow angry if she stirred? ‘I can’t endure this,
uncle!’ she would often declare to me; and I can well understand
it. To play at being a living statue strikes me as wearisome; and I
also should say, ‘Thank you for nothing,’ if my nephew were
to take it into his head, because nature has at least blessed me with a
fairly perfect form, to make me turn and turn on a revolving pedestal
as Cupid with his bow and arrow or as Ganymede with a drinking-cup in
his hand! What do <i>you</i> say, dreamy Cora?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” said Cora. “No one will ask
me to pose as the Cnidian Venus. I have nothing but my
voice....”</p>
<p>“And I nothing but a terrible sleepy feeling!” yawned
Catullus. “I shall stay and sleep here, under the
stars....”</p>
<p>He stretched himself and heaved his body over; two slaves approached
and covered him carefully with silken sheets and woollen <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb16" id="pb16" class="pginternal">16</a>]</span>blankets
and pushed pillows under his head, his loins and his feet. He accepted
their attentions like a child. And, when he had turned over, he at once
fell asleep like a child, with not a wrinkle of care in his bald
forehead, which shone like ivory in the soft light of the stars.</p>
<p>Cora had risen to her feet:</p>
<p>“Good-night, Thrasyllus,” she said.</p>
<p>“Good-night, Cora,” said the tutor, paternally.</p>
<p>The Greek slave, her harp tucked into her arm, moved away slowly.
She lifted the hanging of a cabin which she shared above-deck with some
other slaves. These were sleeping in six or seven narrow beds close
together. A rose-coloured lantern shed a vague glimmer, here over a hip
rounded in sleep, there over a face with shut eyes, framed in black
tresses and white, raised arms.</p>
<p>The slave undressed in silence. Her muslin peplos woven with gold
flowers fell from her. She stood naked. She looked at her wrists, which
were slim, like a patrician’s. She stooped and looked at her
ankles. She arched the instep of her narrow, shapely foot. And she
passed her slender fingers over her hips, which were like a
virgin’s, and over <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb17" id="pb17" class="pginternal">17</a>]</span>her waist, round which she could
almost make her two hands meet. Then she took up a metal hand-mirror
and looked at herself in the light of the rose-coloured lantern. She
half-closed her big eyes, which were like gigantic sapphires in
mother-o’-pearl shells, very soft, very bright, very big, with
the streak of antimony stretching to the temples. Then she smiled.</p>
<p>But next she gave a very deep sigh. She lay down on her little
narrow bed between two other beds. A slave had moved slightly in her
sleep, muttering. Cora drew a sheet over herself; and her great eyes
stared, without seeing, into the rose-coloured lantern.</p>
<p>In the windless night the ship glided over the sea, which was calm
as a lake; and there was nothing but the beating of the oars and the
lulling melodious phrase of the rowers....</p>
<p>Sometimes ... a sing-song order from the steersman, up in his
look-out turret....</p>
<p>And then a creaking of heavy ropes over great pulleys....
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb18" id="pb18" class="pginternal">18</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch3"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e435">Chapter III</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Next morning, the soft, even light of a tea-rose dawn
spread over a magic spectacle, beautiful as a marvellous dream, flimsy
as a vision, compelling as an enchantment. The ship had glided past the
monumental, marble, nine-storeyed Pharos into the Great Harbour; and
Alexandria lay before the eyes of the delighted travellers, Lucius,
Thrasyllus, Catullus, shining pink through diaphanous,
mother-o’-pearl gleams and a slowly-lifting silvery mist, like a
city of magic and fairy-tale. A long, long row of white palaces, with
irregular gables, loomed through the mist and the gleam.</p>
<p>On the left, on the rocks of Lochias, the pillars of the former
royal palace shone magical and fairylike in the silvery mist.
Thrasyllus knew that, since Egypt had become a Roman province, the
legate resided there, surrounded with royal honours. Under the palace
the little square basin of the palace-harbour showed, gay with the
purple sails of the legate’s triremes; with the little island of
Antirrhodos, behind which <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb19" id="pb19" class="pginternal">19</a>]</span>pillars and yet more pillars outlined
more and more clearly the white theatre; with the bight of the
Posidium, where stood the Temple of Poseidon and the great Emporium,
the great market of the merchant shippers, while a pier ran into the
harbour on which, dainty as a marble ornament, stood the villa of the
Timoneum, built by Mark Antony. A riot of luxuriant green gardens, with
the stately crowns of palm-trees and the dreamy-delicate crests of
tamarisks, flung cool, dark nosegays between all those gleaming white
buildings, which began to blink in the ever fiercer sunshine....</p>
<p>Thrasyllus pointed with his finger, along the harbour, the long row
of palaces of the Cæsareum, the huge docks and yards teeming all
motley with people and industry, to the Heptastadium, the
promenade-jetty which stretched out to unite the city with the island
of Pharos, whence the light-house took its name. On the one side of
this pier, with rostra and statues on the marble balustrade and gates,
lay the harbour of Eunostus and the naval docks of Cibotus.</p>
<p>The water on every side was crowded and swarming with vessels:
biremes and triremes, battle-ships and merchant-ships; the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb20" id="pb20" class="pginternal">20</a>]</span>masts
rose like a forest of poplars and the sails glowed like the
many-coloured wings of one bird against another; and, as soon as the
quadrireme glided in, she was surrounded by a host of sloops, filled
with traders, with yelling Arabs and Nubians. The <i>Aphrodite</i>
heaved to; a pilot came on board; then she glided on again through the
press of the sloops, the yelling of the traders and with swanlike
elegance turned and lay to beside the great quay, at the place where
she was expected, the place kept open for her.</p>
<p>The quay, between the obelisks, was alive with a maddening concourse
of people: sailors and merchants, vendors of fruit and water and
vegetables, chattering women, screaming children, Ethiopian beggars,
Greek students, priests of Serapis and Isis, Roman soldiers; and all
pointed at the ship and streamed in unison to gaze at her in wide-eyed
and open-mouthed admiration. For, though numbers of vessels entered the
Great Harbour of Alexandria daily, it was not every day that the quay
was visited by so impressive a quadrireme as this; and the beautiful
ship aroused curiosity.</p>
<p>The three travellers stood on the prow, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb21" id="pb21" class="pginternal">21</a>]</span>beside
the silver figure of Aphrodite, and Catullus said, in an appreciative
tone:</p>
<p>“It’s not half bad. Just look at that row of palaces! It
is as though Alexandria were one great palace, opening on its harbour!
And what people, white, dark and black, all mixed! And what a noise
they make, what a noise! We are much calmer in Italy!... Do look,
Lucius, at all those ibises walking about on the quay, quiet and tame,
pecking here and there, upon my word as though they were at home! Do
you see the ibises, Thrasyllus? I thought that they just stood and
dreamed on one leg, beside the Nile, like poetic birds ... and, the
moment I arrive, I see great flocks of them actually walking on the
quay of Alexandria’s harbour! White ibises, black ibises, piebald
ibises! What a crowd of ibises! What a crowd of them! And so dignified,
much more dignified than the people! Ye gods, what a noisy crew the
Alexandrians are!”</p>
<p>The gangway was slung from the ship to the quay; and the master was
receiving the port-authorities, to whom he had to show his papers, when
two men came hurrying across the gangway, which was hedged in by a
guard of sailors to protect it against any <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb22" id="pb22" class="pginternal">22</a>]</span>intrusion of the gaping populace. One of them was
an obvious Latin, the other a dark-skinned Sabæan.</p>
<p>“Well, Vettius!” said Lucius, welcoming the Latin, who
was his steward. “I am glad to see you again and I hope that your
voyage was as prosperous as ours!”</p>
<p>Vettius the steward bowed low before his young master, bowed
ceremoniously before fat Uncle Catullus. He had travelled ahead of his
master to seek suitable lodgings at Alexandria and he seemed very well
pleased with what he had found, for he pointed joyfully to the
dark-skinned Sabæan, who had kept behind and now bobbed down with
many salaams and respectful assurances, uttered in a language that
fluctuated between Latin, Greek, Phœnician and Arabic.</p>
<p>“This is Master Ghizla, a native of Saba, my lord,” said
Vettius, presenting him, “the owner of the largest guest-house in
Alexandria; and he has at your disposal a row of three suites, standing
in their own gardens, with spacious annexes, near the guest-house
proper; and I am convinced that, when we have put in our own furniture,
they will afford a fit residence for you and the honourable Catullus.
Of course, when travelling, all <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb23" id="pb23" class="pginternal">23</a>]</span>conveniences are but temporary
and not to be compared with your insula at Rome or your villa at
Baiæ, now the property of our gracious Emperor
Tiberius.”</p>
<p>“It is well, it is well, Vettius,” said Lucius.
“We shall not be too hard to please. Are there baths attached to
them?”</p>
<p>“There are most comfortable baths attached to them, my
lord,” declared Master Ghizla, bobbing down twice and thrice in
salaams. “And there are taps with very cold water and taps with
very hot water. They are suites which I let only to princely nobles
like your lordship; and I have had the honour of lodging in them the
Persian Prince Kardusi, whom you surely know, and Baabab, Satrap of
Mesopotamia, whom you also surely know, my lords, as princely
nobles.”</p>
<p>“Certainly, certainly,” replied Lucius, trying to jest.
“Kardusi and Baabab, I know them well.”</p>
<p>“We are even related to them and call them by their
names,” Uncle Catullus broke in, airily, with a bow and puffing
out his stomach. “But there is something that <i>I</i> want to
ask you, Master Ghizla, something that neither his lordship nor Master
Vettius will care so much about: are there <i>kitchens</i> <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb24" id="pb24" class="pginternal">24</a>]</span>to the
suites, kitchens where our trusty cook can prepare us this or that
simple fare?”</p>
<p>“There are most comfortable kitchens to these princely suites,
my lord,” Master Ghizla assured him. “His Highness the
Satrap Baabab often gave very sumptuous banquets and would invite his
excellency the legate to his table every other day; and near the
kitchens there is a well of water clear as crystal.”</p>
<p>“I don’t drink much water,” said Uncle
Catullus.</p>
<p>“We have old Mareotis wine in our cellars, my lord, wine thick
as ink, dark-purple as molten princely sealing-wax and fragrant as the
own lotus of our Lady Isis, blessed be her name! We have also the
rose-coloured date-wine of Meroe and the fine topaz-yellow liqueur of
Napata: we have all the Ethiopian liqueurs....”</p>
<p>“That’s better than water,” said Uncle Catullus,
smacking his lips. “What say you, my dear Lucius?”</p>
<p>Lucius had made a great effort that morning to control his grief;
together with his uncle and the tutor, he had stared with interest at
the splendid panorama that unrolled itself before their eyes as they
entered the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb25" id="pb25" class="pginternal">25</a>]</span>Great Harbour; he had welcomed his steward Vettius
with a kind word; he had interested himself in the apartments which he
was to occupy. Now, however, tired and listless, he had sunk into a
seat, beside the silver image of the goddess, and sat looking
disconsolately in front of him. He was a tall, comely fellow, with an
athletic frame developed by wrestling exercise; and his dark eyes,
though now veiled with melancholy and longing, gleamed with a deep
spark of intelligence. Immensely rich, the sole heir of various
relatives who had died childless, he had joined for but a short time in
the mad orgies of the young Romans of his own rank and had soon devoted
himself to many branches of science, to astronomy in particular,
philosophy, magic, the favourite passion of that period; he amused
himself with modelling and sculpture; as a collector, he loved
everything that was beautiful: pictures and statues, old coins and old
glass; and his Etruscan antiquities were famous all over Rome.
Certainly, he had always desired to see Egypt, to travel through Egypt;
and the sight of the marble palaces of Alexandria had already charmed
him for a moment. But his grief and longing <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb26" id="pb26" class="pginternal">26</a>]</span>returned
to him immediately after; red anger awoke in him once more and impotent
fury that Ilia, his best-beloved slave, had vanished, one inauspicious
morning, from his villa at Baiæ, without leaving a trace behind
her.</p>
<p>“Come, Lucius,” said Catullus, “we’re going
on shore now, my dear fellow. There are our litters waiting for us,
prepared by Master Ghizla’s care....”</p>
<p>“With excellent, powerful Libyan bearers, my lord, bearers
whom I reserve exclusively for princely nobles like you....”</p>
<p>“And, if you care first to take a turn through the city,
sir,” Vettius proffered, “I will see to it that the
furniture and baggage are conveyed from the ships to your apartments,
so that you will find everything arranged in time for
luncheon.”</p>
<p>Although Lucius of course travelled with his own litters and his own
bearers, Ghizla and Vettius had judged that two Alexandrian litters,
with twelve Libyan bearers, would serve his purpose better at
Alexandria, especially because here they were accustomed to move
quicker, at a trot, than in Rome, where the pace was statelier and
slower. Master Ghizla, therefore, who would not fail to charge the
litters and bearers in <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb27" id="pb27" class="pginternal">27</a>]</span>his bill at double the price and more, had
quickly and slyly set out his litters in front of the gangway, before
Rufus, the under-steward, had even thought of preparing his
master’s own litter.</p>
<p>“Very well, Vettius,” said Lucius, making an effort and
rising. “I see two litters: those are for Uncle Catullus and me.
And how is our good Thrasyllus to accompany us? For he knows the city
already from the writings of Eratosthenes and Strabo; he can tell us
much that is interesting on the way; and the tour would not afford us
half the same pleasure without him.”</p>
<p>“I have had a good donkey saddled for Master
Thrasyllus,” said Master Ghizla, with a salaam.</p>
<p>In fact, an ass, held by a boy on a leading-rein, stood waiting
behind the litters, among the open-mouthed populace.</p>
<p>“And if,” the Sabæan hinted, suavely, “if I
might entrust the noble lords to the conduct of my younger brother
Caleb, he will go in front of the noble lords and act as a guide with
whom they will doubtless be no less satisfied than were the Prince of
Persia and the Satrap of Mesopotamia....”</p>
<p>“Kardusi and Baabab,” Uncle Catullus <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb28" id="pb28" class="pginternal">28</a>]</span>completed, mischievously. “Two pleasant,
simple fellows: I’m sorry they’re gone.”</p>
<p>But Ghizla pointed to Caleb, who now came up with a flourish of
salaams and bowed. As against Ghizla, who was tall, lean and dignified,
Caleb, the younger man, was vivacious and sparkling, with dark eyes,
flashing teeth and a gay, smiling mouth. He wore wide striped trousers
of many colours, a white burnous, a red turban and large rings in his
ears; and he spoke better Latin than his brother, with now and then a
few sentences of Greek.</p>
<p>Lucius accepted Caleb as his guide; and they went on shore; and
Lucius and Uncle Catullus took their seats in their litters. Thrasyllus
mounted his quiet donkey; but Caleb flung himself with a swagger on to
a jet-black, gaily-caparisoned Sabæan mare, who neighed when she
felt the red heels of Caleb’s sandals in her flanks. So the
procession started: first three ebon-black outrunners, with whips which
they cracked right and left to make room, to drive barking dogs away
and to keep beggars at a distance; then Caleb, proudly sitting his
horse like a young conqueror, always smiling and sparkling with black
eyes and white teeth; then the two <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb29" id="pb29" class="pginternal">29</a>]</span>litters, with Thrasyllus at the
side on his donkey; and round the three travellers a number of guards,
armed with whips and sticks.</p>
<p>They pressed through the crowd along the quay, where everybody
looked and pointed at the distinguished foreigners; they went at a
quick trot, for the outrunners went at a trot, cracking their whips;
Caleb, on his Sabæan mare, showed off his equestrian powers and
pranced elegantly along upon his steed; the litter-bearers followed at
a short, steady quick-trot; even Thrasyllus’ donkey, as sober as
a philosopher, trotted blithely on; and behind trotted the guards,
shaking their sticks and flourishing their long whips. They trotted
along the middle of the broad street, over the great stone flags; and
it seemed as though everything were trotting in a quick rhythm,
including all the other litters, the carts and horsemen, who with their
outrunners and outriders also strove to make their way through the
bustle.</p>
<p>So the cavalcade trotted on; and the street-boys scattered and the
ibises scattered with outstretched necks and wide-flapping wings.</p>
<p>“What crowds of ibises!” Catullus cried. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb30" id="pb30" class="pginternal">30</a>]</span>“Thrasyllus, isn’t it comical to see
so many ibises walking and fluttering through the streets of
Alexandria?”</p>
<p>“My lord,” cried Thrasyllus, from the back of his
dancing donkey, “the ibises are Alexandria’s
scavengers.”</p>
<p>“I dare say, but they are unclean birds themselves for all
that! And they are counted among the sacred animals!” cried Uncle
Catullus. “Whoosh! Whoosh!”</p>
<p>And he drove them away, with a flourish of his arm from the litter,
for the whips of the runners trotting behind circled, it is true,
around the street-boys but ever spared the sacred ibises, one of which
would sometimes stray, fluttering wildly, among the bearers.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Caleb continued to give a graceful equestrian performance
on his snorting mare beside Lucius’ litter:</p>
<p>“My lord!” cried Caleb. “Do you see the
Heptastadium? The great bridge leading to the Pharos? Do you see that
tall-masted ships are able to sail under it? It is an interesting walk
there of an evening, my lord: all the beauties of Alexandria go there;
and a great nobleman like yourself need but make his choice and any
hetaira in Alexandria <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb31" id="pb31" class="pginternal">31</a>]</span>will fall at his feet! This is the Moon Gate,
my lord! And this is the High Street: behind it lies the Rhacotis
quarter, which is very interesting at night, my lord, most interesting
for any one like your lordship to roam through in disguise. But now we
are going through the High Street; and here, you see, is the Square,
where the High Street crosses the Museum Street and the Avenue of
Pillars.”</p>
<p>Lucius looked around him with enjoyment. They were still going at a
trot, a trot of mare and runners and bearers and donkey, a noisy
trotting between shouting and laughing voices and cracking whips, while
in the streets and squares the hucksters also shouted and laughed and
swore, while the street-boys cheered and screamed for an obolus and the
ibises, flapping their wings, darted away, to alight again elsewhere
and act as scavengers to Alexandria.</p>
<p>“It is very different from Rome in every way,” thought
Lucius. “It is the east.”</p>
<p>Yes, it was the east. It was Egypt, it was Alexandria. Never in the
Forum at Rome, lively and busy though it was, never in the basilicas
had Lucius beheld this ever trotting, ever hurrying tumult. It was as
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb32" id="pb32" class="pginternal">32</a>]</span>though every one were pressed for time and
hurrying feverishly. Processions of priests hurried; the Roman guards
even, returning from the Palace after being relieved, marched with an
accelerated step; and yet the numerous litters never struck against one
another: they all glided at the trot of their bearers, to the right, to
the left, beside one another; there was only a shouting, a din, a
cursing, a cracking of whips loud enough to rouse the dead. Here was a
quarrel, with violent gestures and shrill voices; there the noisy
gaiety of squabbling vegetable-women and bawling vendors of
water-melons; suddenly, in a rage, the women flung cabbages at the
vendors’ heads and the vendors sent melons trundling between the
women’s legs; the cabbages and melons rolled across the street
and the crowd yelled with enjoyment, while distinguished but still
trotting processions of notables in litters or on horseback made a way
for themselves. The cabbages and melons rolled in front of the feet of
Lucius’ bearers; and Caleb, rising in his stirrups with flapping
burnous and uplifted arms, hardly holding the reins in his fingers
while the mare reared on her hind-legs, poured forth a torrent of
curses over the women <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb33" id="pb33" class="pginternal">33</a>]</span>and the hucksters ... and then turned to
Lucius with a pleased smile, as though all this tumult were the most
ordinary morning affair in the streets of Alexandria.... Yes, that was
the Egyptian character: bustle, tumult, uproar, yelling and cursing for
the least thing; quarrelling for the least thing; and then everything
just ordinary again, as though nothing had happened. All this in a
motley whirl of colours: Rome was monotonously white and colourless
beside it, Lucius thought. Here the colours glared more fiercely: the
citrons, oranges and melons lay yellow and gold over the markets; and
there were exotic fruits too, scarlet and vermilion....</p>
<p>They came to the painters’ quarter. Troughs of used
colouring-matter ran in gutters along the streets: there were rivulets
of indigo, there were little waterfalls of ochre. The bearers splashed
through purple and trotted on with purple-black feet. A golden whirl of
dust in the morning sun powdered over these motley colours as with
handfuls of the finest glittering sand. Tall buildings shot up their
pillars in that glitter, seemed to shimmer, to move in that shimmer of
light. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb34" id="pb34" class="pginternal">34</a>]</span></p>
<p>Caleb now pointed to the Acropolis, standing fortress-like,
four-square and heavy, protecting and dominating the city. Next came
the Sun Gate. Outside the city-wall was a canal; along the canal ran an
avenue of tall sycamores, bringing a sudden blissful calm and coolness
and silver-green shadows. And now Caleb pointed to the famous lake,
Lake Mareotis: it lay spread out like a sea, but was divided by
isthmuses into smaller inland lakes; there were islands often bearing
some temple to Aphrodite; and along the margins of the lake rose villa
after villa, in royal pomp of marble-coloured villas, casting their
reflections into the limpid water.</p>
<p>“That is where the rich hetairæ live,” said Caleb,
with a wink, “hetairæ for people like your lordship: a
prince like you can take your choice.”</p>
<p>Tall papyrus shot up on the lake’s edge. There were
papyrus-eyots: the stalks rustled at the least breeze; and on the eyots
lived the basket-makers: there were families of basket-makers; the
children weaving baskets and hampers looked up and cried out for an
obolus. White lotus and pink water-lilies blossomed and small gilt
barges passed across the lake, with coloured awnings to <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb35" id="pb35" class="pginternal">35</a>]</span>them.
Ibises and cranes fluttered out of the reeds.</p>
<p>“You must come here again in the evening, my lord,”
Caleb advised, winking eagerly. “This is the place for one like
your lordship to enjoy himself: at Rhacotis there are only the common
women and the houses where the sailors go. But many princely nobles
like to see everything at Alexandria.”</p>
<p>The procession trotted back through the Gate of the Sun, which made
a wide breach in the city-walls, a vaulted arch above Corinthian
pillars; and Caleb said:</p>
<p>“We are now coming to the Avenue of Pillars and to the
Museum.”</p>
<p>Here again were the bustle, the tumult, the uproar, the shouting and
cheering and cursing, the multitude, litters, horsemen, pedestrians.
The Avenue of Pillars also was swarming, mainly with students,
philosophers and loose women. The sun blazed down in the middle of the
street; there were golden patches of light and blue-purple islands of
shadow. And there was always the golden glitter of dust, as of the
finest sand whirling through the air. Here were the hair-dressers and
barbers; here were the baths, here the tailors’-shops with their
riot of colours and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb36" id="pb36" class="pginternal">36</a>]</span>here the glittering jewellers’-shops
and here, behind tables, stood the money-changers. There were stretches
of green garden; and behind the gardens loomed the colonnades of the
Museum. Close by were the Gymnasium and the Athletic School.</p>
<p>“Will your lordship visit the Museum?” asked Caleb,
still parading his horsemanship on the Sabæan mare.</p>
<p>Thrasyllus thought that it would be interesting to visit the Museum;
and the travellers alighted. There was a great rush to see them. Uncle
Catullus threw oboli among the street-boys, who rolled over one
another, fighting. Beggars approached, grey-bearded men like prophets
and old women like sibyls; and Lucius flung a coin here and there.</p>
<p>The runners and guards drew themselves up around the two litters,
the mare and the donkey; but Caleb walked in front of the travellers,
mincing elegantly on the tips of his red riding-boots and holding the
hem of his burnous in his swaying hand. It was as though he were always
dancing, whether on horseback or on foot.</p>
<p>“The Museum,” Caleb explained, “is, as your
lordships know, the Academy of Alexandria, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb37" id="pb37" class="pginternal">37</a>]</span>founded
by the beautiful Cleopatra.”</p>
<p>“That is not true,” Thrasyllus whispered to his young
master. “It was founded by Ptolemy the First.”</p>
<p>“Here philosophers and scholars in every branch of science
devote themselves to study; and they are surrounded by thousands of
disciples from all countries. But both masters and pupils are as poor
as rats and do not, all told, possess ... <i>that!</i>” said
Caleb, with a flip of his finger and thumb.</p>
<p>“The Museum has produced great scholars,” Thrasyllus
expounded, more appreciatively, “such as Euclid, Erasistratus and
Diophantus; then there were the poets Theocritus, Aratus, Callimachus;
and among critics Aristarchus; and among philosophers more than I could
name.”</p>
<p>“And because they are so poor, all these learned
gentry,” said Caleb, with a laugh, pointing, as they entered the
gardens of the Museum through a portico, to stately white-cloaked
figures walking to and fro, “because they are so poor, they live
on a fund provided by the State: they’re no use for anything,
these learned gentry; but they are certainly clever, my lords,
they’re all that: you won’t find their equals for
cleverness <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb38" id="pb38" class="pginternal">38</a>]</span>anywhere. And the books they collect! Their
library is quite famous.... Look,” continued Caleb, pointing,
“it is just the time when they have their mid-day meal: it seems
to be philosophical to do so earlier than princely nobles are used to
do. No doubt it will interest you, as strangers, to see so many very
wise and poverty-stricken scholars and philosophers eating their black
broth.”</p>
<p>The colonnades of the Museum loomed aloft; there were statues to
commemorate famous men of learning; and there was an immense rounded
exedra, from which lectures were delivered at frequent intervals. The
travellers entered the cenaculum, the refectory, which was wide, lofty
and very long; the scholars and philosophers sat eating at long tables;
Lucius was struck by the fact that they were sitting, instead of
reclining.</p>
<p>“They don’t know any better,” Caleb explained.
“They just sit down for a moment and gobble up their broth; they
are not epicures, they are only just clever, you see. They have more in
their heads, my lords, than in their pockets. But they have plenty in
their heads beyond a doubt.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb39" id="pb39" class="pginternal">39</a>]</span></p>
<p>A philosopher moved towards the strangers. He was very old, frail
and grey and looked like a long dry stalk, in his toga. He smiled and
mumbled words which at first were incomprehensible. From the folds of
his garment he stretched forth a clawlike hand. He was begging; and
Lucius gave him some money.</p>
<p>“The highest philosophy is ... to be satisfied with
little,” he then said, plainly, in pure Greek.</p>
<p>And he bowed, ironically, and turned away with the movement of a
long dry stalk, in his dirty cloak.</p>
<p>“The shameless rascal!” cried Uncle Catullus,
indignantly.</p>
<p>But Lucius laughed and looked down the long table at which the men
of learning ate. Sometimes a beggar would come up to them; and they
gave him their bread and fruit. Sometimes, too, dogs snuffled around;
and the men of learning flung them their offal, over which the dogs
choked greedily. Two ibises also walked in ludicrous high-legged state
through the cenaculum, pecking here and there, and kept the floor
clean, though they themselves were not so cleanly.</p>
<p>The travellers returned to their litters; <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb40" id="pb40" class="pginternal">40</a>]</span>and,
amid much shouting and cursing and swearing at street-boys and cracking
of whips at beggars, the procession started, while Caleb, for no
reason, insisted on making his mare rear and curvet across the street
with elegant movements of her fore-feet.</p>
<p>But now, smiling with his black eyes and white teeth, he bent to one
side, low enough almost to slip from his mount, and asked Lucius:</p>
<p>“Would your lordship now like to see the Soma?”</p>
<p>And through the public gardens of Bruchium, along the
Paneum—an artificial little rocky mountain built up in the shape
of a top or pineapple—the procession trotted to the Soma, the
burying-place of the Ptolemies, where it lay in the cool shade of
sycamores and tamarisks. A long avenue of recumbent sphinxes,
male—bearded—and female—high-breasted—led to
the pyramid tombs. The travellers alighted and the old priests in
charge appeared.</p>
<p>“These distinguished strangers wish to see the burial-places
of the Ptolemies,” said Caleb. “They are princely nobles
and no doubt will also be interested in the tomb of Alexander the
Great.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb41" id="pb41" class="pginternal">41</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Death is but a slumbering and a twilight transition to the
halls of eternal sunshine,” replied the priest in charge.
“Earthly greatness is the perishable step to the imperishable
palace of Osiris, where our dead monarchs now sit enthroned around him,
their heads circled with the pschent and their hands grasping the
scarab sceptre. And great Isis has appeared to them as the splendour of
truth, for she lifted her veil for their delight, so that they saw her.
Life is but a dream, death is a bridge and eternity is life.”</p>
<p>Caleb walked mincingly in front, on the tips of his red
riding-boots, and pointed out things, while the old priest went on
reciting the eternal verities, as though to himself, The tombs of
granite, porphyry and marble, inscribed with hieroglyphics, rose like
temples, pyramid-shaped. The priest now went in front of the travellers
and descended a few steps: inside, in the subterranean vault,
invisible, the mummies rested in their painted sarcophagi; standing
lamps burned on their tripods, perfumes rose in a cloud from vases and
dishes; and daintily-coloured glass vessels, filled with oil, honey and
fruit, stood on low bronze tables, while amphoræ of consecrated
water awaited the hour of the resurrection, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb42" id="pb42" class="pginternal">42</a>]</span>when the
dead should rise and be baptized into the true new life, which was
eternity. There was an overpowering scent of sickly-sweet aromatics;
and in the mist of the perfumes the big, wide-open eyes of the painted
images on the sarcophagus-lids stared, ghostly and superhuman, straight
before them into the brightening future. They were images of bearded
kings and ibis-crowned queens; sometimes they were images of
children.</p>
<p>Through the mist of the aromatics the golden, winged suns gleamed in
the embrace of the snakes coiled tail in mouth. Sacred Horus, son of
Osiris and Isis, the radiant redeemer of mankind, who descended out of
pity on a sinful world, bestrode Typhon, the grinning spirit of evil.
There were images of the god Apis, of the god Râ, of Thoth and
Anubis, with the heads of an ox, an ibis, a dog.</p>
<p>After this, the shade of the sycamores and tamarisks outside the
tombs was silver-green and cool; and the pure air of the sunny morning
seemed strange after the perfumed, sickly-sweet atmosphere of the
sultry underground sepulchres. The priest in charge stopped before a
gleaming marble pyramid. The narrow bronze door hung tapering upwards
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb43" id="pb43" class="pginternal">43</a>]</span>between pilasters carved with lotus-capitals.</p>
<p>“The tomb of Alexander of Macedon,” said the custodian,
solemnly.</p>
<p>They went inside. Again, burning lamps shed their fragrance. There
was a heavy mist of nard. Behind a bronze railing on a basalt pedestal
stood a sarcophagus of transparent crystal, polished and engraved. And
within this thick crystal, in a green watery light, where the flame of
the lamps was mirrored in the glass, a mummy lay visible. It was like
the chrysalis of a gigantic moth. The face was stained brown with
balsam and salve and stared with eyes of beryl. The hair and short
beard were painted gold. Many-coloured bandages wrapped the body in a
close sheath; and the legs also were closely fastened together in a
case of gold filagree.</p>
<p>The mummy lay on a mattress of striped byssus, the head on a byssus
pillow. The scarlet lips seemed to grin in the crisp golden beard and
the beryl eyes were full of amazement at what they saw in eternity.</p>
<p>“These are the sacred remains of the great Alexander,”
said the priest in charge. “History teaches us that Ptolemy, son
of Lagus, took the body of the hero and conqueror from Perdiccas, who
was bringing it back <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb44" id="pb44" class="pginternal">44</a>]</span>from Babylon to Macedon, but was passing
through Egypt in the hope of conquering our sacred country. Ptolemy
marched against him; Perdiccas had hardly set foot in Egypt when he
perished at the hands of his own soldiery on an island which had been
surrounded by Ptolemy’s troops. With Perdiccas were the royal
family: Alexander’s pregnant widow Roxana and her young children.
They were allowed to embark for Macedon, but the body of Alexander the
Great was carried to Alexandria and buried in state in a massive gold
sarcophagus. This sarcophagus was stolen by Ptolemy Parisactus, a
pretender to the Egyptian throne, who invaded the country from Syria
with a host of troops. Alexander’s body, however, was rescued
from his hands and laid in this crystal coffin. Here it
lies.”</p>
<p>Lucius and his companions stared, greatly moved by the sight of this
corpse nearly three centuries old, embalmed and bandaged, with its feet
in a sheath of gold filagree and its beryl eyes staring with surprise.
Was this chrysalis all that remained of the great Alexander, whom the
oracle of Ammon had declared to be the son of Ammon-Râ son of the
sun-god? <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb45" id="pb45" class="pginternal">45</a>]</span></p>
<p>Only Caleb remained indifferent, with his mincing gait and an
incredulous little laugh at the genuineness of Alexander’s body,
to which he had already conducted so many “princely
nobles,” including Kardusi of Persia and Baabab of
Mesopotamia.</p>
<p>“Here lies Alexander the Great,” continued the priest in
charge. “The warrior, the conqueror, the king of kings, the son
of the sacred sun-god, Ammon-Râ, descended upon earth. He lived
to be thirty-three in this terrestrial life. But this life is a dream
and death is the bridge to the life that is the eternal reality. The
soul has departed from this house embalmed with precious
ointments....”</p>
<p>And he added, in a different voice:</p>
<p>“Even to your excellencies the charge is only one gold stater
a head....”</p>
<p>“I will pay for you, my lord!” smiled Caleb, with an
elegant bow to Lucius.</p>
<p>And he paid the priest, who went on speaking, with the gold coins
shining in his uplifted hand:</p>
<p>“Generosity is a great virtue. He who gives more than he is
asked to give earns the favour of Thoth, who sews the good chances of
fortune upon the earth.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb46" id="pb46" class="pginternal">46</a>]</span></p>
<p>Caleb grinned with flashing teeth to show that he understood and
dropped another half-stater into the priest’s palm.</p>
<p>The travellers stepped out of the sepulchre. The sunny morning
outside seemed strange, with silver-green shadows between waving
tamarisks and rustling sycamore-leaves.</p>
<p>Lucius was pale. And he said to Thrasyllus and Uncle Catullus:</p>
<p>“Death!... Death!... She is perhaps dead.... She is drowned,
perhaps, in the sea ... and we shall never recover her exquisite body,
to embalm it....”</p>
<p>“In any case she has disappeared, my dear nephew,” said
Uncle Catullus, trying to console him. “Let us think of her no
more. By all the gods, try to forget her: she had thick ankles and
large feet.... Lucius, do be sensible at last! Enjoy yourself during
this interesting tour. We have had a morning more interesting than any
that we ever had at Rome. We have seen an ideal system of scavenging,
we have heard philosophical and religious truths and we have seen the
mummy of Alexander! I’ve really received too many new
impressions. My brains are soaked like an overfull <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb47" id="pb47" class="pginternal">47</a>]</span>sponge:
they can contain no more this morning. That sated condition of the head
makes my stomach feel empty, as empty as my pocket when your liberality
has forgotten to line it for your old uncle. My dear Lucius, when
travelling one must be sparing ... of one’s powers. I suggest to
our indefatigable guide that we should go home and see if, in our
absence, our trusty cook has remembered that, though life is a dream,
even the dead and therefore all the more the living have to be fed. The
dead are sustained with oil, honey and fruit: I am curious to see what
our cook’s pious thoughts have prepared to-day for the
living.”</p>
<p>The procession trotted home through the gardens of Bruchium, the
palace quarter, and along the Hippodrome to Master Ghizla’s great
diversorium, or guest-house. It stood near the Canopian gate in an oval
garden, behind a hedge of tall cactuses; the door opened between two
figures of Hermes. Here sat the janitor, or porter; and the travellers
were struck by the fact that a winged head of Hermes, in marble,
crowned the marble architrave of the door. Caducei, or
Hermes’-wands, with winding snakes, were carved on the pilasters
of the door; for the diversorium <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb48" id="pb48" class="pginternal">48</a>]</span>was dedicated to Hermes and
known in the quarter as the Hermes House.</p>
<p>The janitor rose and bowed, with his hands stretched to the ground.
Master Ghizla also, standing beside a statue of Hermes in the middle of
his garden, bowed in this fashion, bending low, with his hands
stretched groundwards.</p>
<p>The procession trotted in, the travellers alighted, but Caleb sat
his mare, bowed gracefully and, stooping forward, whispered in
Lucius’ ear:</p>
<p>“After you have rested, my lord, I will take you whither you
please, I will procure you whatsoever you please ... for your
lordship’s pleasure and gratification. Whithersoever you please
and whatsoever you please.... I wish you good luck at your
repast.”</p>
<p>With that he threw the mare on her haunches, stood up in the
stirrups, waved his burnous, uttered a cry and rode away, in a cloud of
graceful gestures.</p>
<p>The diversorium consisted of several low buildings. It harboured
Arabian and Phœnician merchants, who looked out curiously,
squatting on mats or lying at their meal, served by black slaves. But
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb49" id="pb49" class="pginternal">49</a>]</span>Master Ghizla led his “princely
guests” to their own suites; and Vettius and Rufus received the
travellers on the threshold. They had worked to good purpose, conveying
furniture, boxes and packing-cases on camels and mules. A Babylonian
carpet lay upon the floor; the travellers’ own beds were ready;
in the corners of Lucius’ bedroom stood bronze and marble
statues, for no important Roman with any pretension to taste travelled
without carrying a few of his treasures with him; and perfumes burned
before the statues. There were curtains hanging from rings; and
garments lay ready, neatly folded and strewn with fragrant flowers, on
long, low, sycamore-wood tables. There were metal mirrors on bronze
pedestals; all the brushes, tweezers and unguent-sticks, in gold
adorned with agates, lay spread on bronze tables; all the jars, pots
and vases essential to the toilet stood filled with cosmetics,
ointments and perfumes. All this furniture and upholstery, all these
useful and artistic possessions had been brought over from the
ship.</p>
<p>“My diversorium boasts every possible comfort, my lord, and
all the latest conveniences,” bragged Ghizla, “which
visitors <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb50" id="pb50" class="pginternal">50</a>]</span>like your lordship demand in these
days.”</p>
<p>He lifted a curtain beside Lucius’ couch: there was in fact a
marble basin with taps, under a canopy.</p>
<p>“And here,” said Master Ghizla, “is your
triclinium.”</p>
<p>The dining-room which Master Ghizla described by this high-sounding
name was a pleasant, spacious, airy apartment, with sun-blinds between
pillars; and, as Lucius entered, he was greeted with the music of
harps. For all the wealthy young Roman’s “family”
were drawn up there in two rows, awaiting his arrival: Vettius and
Rufus and Tarrar, the little black slave; all his slaves, male and
female, all the great household without which no distinguished Roman
thought it possible to live, even—indeed especially—when
travelling. And, amid the female slaves, stood the Greek slave from
Cos, Cora, with two other harpists; and they drew long, descending
cords from their strings, while Cora sang a short song of welcome to
the gracious master. Incense burned on dishes; two S-shaped couches
coiled round a long, low table covered with a yellow-and-white cloth
and already laid with yellow-and-white crockery and gleaming gold
plate. A little fountain of <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb51" id="pb51" class="pginternal">51</a>]</span>verbena-water played in the middle of
a bowl filled with blue lotus.</p>
<p>Lucius assured Vettius and Rufus that he was really pleased; indeed
it was as though he were at home. Then, because Uncle Catullus said
that he was starving, he invited his uncle and parasite, who had so
often diverted him with a merry jest, to lie down, lay down himself and
motioned Thrasyllus, his friend and tutor, to a stool by his side, for,
though Thrasyllus shared his pupil’s meals, as a freedman he
remained the inferior and ate seated. Tarrar and three girl-slaves
waited, while Cora and the two harpists struck a soft melody from their
strings or danced a little ballet.</p>
<p>Uncle Catullus was glad to have neither oysters nor roast peacock
set before him: Lucius’ cook had surpassed himself, in this first
exotic repast, with a first course of peppered water-melon in sugared
wine-sauce, with which was served an Egyptian spiced bread, named
caces; next, young tunnies, surrounded by savoury eggs, stuffed olives
and finely chopped coxcombs; next, a sucking-pig served on bread-fruit
and cucumbers; lastly, a honey-tart, covered with a cream custard
containing stoned dates and cinnamon. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb52" id="pb52" class="pginternal">52</a>]</span>They had the celebrated
Mareotis wine, thick as ink and purple as molten wax, poured by Master
Ghizla himself out of a jar still warm from the sun; and there was the
topaz-yellow Ethiopian liqueur of Napata, which he dripped drop by drop
into goblets filled with snow and which spread an aroma as of roses
steeped in silphium.</p>
<p>Uncle Catullus ate his fill and Lucius too did honour to the meal,
however much his heart still suffered and craved, while Thrasyllus was
moderate as always. Then a legitimate drowsiness overcame the three
travellers and they withdrew behind their curtains, to rest.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb53" id="pb53" class="pginternal">53</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch4"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e732">Chapter IV</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">But Lucius did not sleep. Now that he was alone, he
felt the agony of his suffering and affliction. He drew a sandal from a
little casket, a woman’s blue-leather sandal adorned with gold
relief and small, for all that Uncle Catullus was pleased to say. It
was the only trace that Ilia had left behind her. And he kissed the
sandal and groaned and stretched himself out impotently and clenched
his fists and lay like that, staring before him without moving.</p>
<p>He lay lost in thought. And suddenly he struck the gong and summoned
Tarrar, who entered nimbly and respectfully:</p>
<p>“Find Caleb and bring him here to me.”</p>
<p>The little slave returned in a short time and ushered in Caleb, who
approached with graceful salaams. Tarrar left his master alone with the
Sabæan.</p>
<p>“Caleb,” said Lucius, “sit down and listen. I need
your advice.”</p>
<p>“Your faithful servant is listening, my lord,” said
Caleb, sitting down on a chair.</p>
<p>“Caleb,” continued Lucius, “I have not
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb54" id="pb54" class="pginternal">54</a>]</span>come to Egypt merely to see the things of interest
which this country supplies. I have another object. There are
mysterious oracles in Egypt; there are prophets and sibyls, so I am
told, living in the desert. I want to know something. I want to know
where some one is, one who is dear to me and far away. I want to
consult the oracles and the prophets and sibyls. You must conduct me,
without saying a word to my uncle or my tutor, because they do not
approve of the attempts which I wish to make to find this person whom I
love. Be my guide, Caleb, and I will reward you.”</p>
<p>“I will be your guide, my lord,” replied Caleb,
“and this very night I will conduct you....”</p>
<p>“Where?”</p>
<p>“To the sibyl of Rhacotis, an old sorceress who knows
everything.”</p>
<p>“We will go by ourselves, in secret.”</p>
<p>“Very well, my lord; no one shall accompany us.... What do you
think: would you not like a cool sherbet after your rest? And divert
yourself with looking at the goods which the travelling merchants from
distant foreign lands, who happen to-day to be staying in the
diversorium, have to offer <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb55" id="pb55" class="pginternal">55</a>]</span>for sale? I will have the sherbet
prepared and the merchants informed, my lord. And to-night I will lead
you through Rhacotis: we will go by ourselves, my lord, and no one
shall know anything of our nocturnal expedition.”</p>
<p>Caleb went away; Tarrar drew the curtains aside. Beyond the
bedchamber was a pillared portico; and the green shadow of the
palm-garden outside fell within doors. Uncle Catullus was still asleep,
but Thrasyllus already sat reading his Egyptian guide-books at a table
under a palm-tree. The wonderful, fantastic stories of Herodotus
charmed the old tutor’s mind, which was not disinclined to
fantasy; but Thrasyllus also took pleasure in the more succinct
descriptions of the learned Eratosthenes, Ptolemy Evergetes’
librarian, who lived three centuries before and was a noted astronomer,
philosopher and geographer. Thrasyllus loved to consult his splendid
maps, which had never yet been bettered and which lay spread in heavy
parchment on the table before him; and the tutor followed the
cinnabar-traced Nile on these maps down to Ethiopia and the mysterious
sources of the sacred stream. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb56" id="pb56" class="pginternal">56</a>]</span></p>
<p>Yes, Eratosthenes was the most respectable guide. When he went
blind, in his eighty-second year, he starved himself. Thrasyllus
honoured him as a martyr of science. But the tutor also consulted
Artemidorus and Hypsicrates, for he wished to be well-informed about
the country which he was about to visit, that mysterious country of
age-old history and colossal art, while also he did not despise the
quite modern writings of his contemporary, Strabo: what a contemporary
told about a country over the whole of which he had travelled was
perhaps most important of all, because of its practical utility and
also because of the freshness of the new impressions.</p>
<p>So Thrasyllus sat under his palm-tree at a table strewn with
unrolled papyri; more scrolls stood in a case by his side; and his
fingers followed the cinnabar-traced Nile. Lucius in the portico smiled
in kindly approval. But the travelling merchants, led by Caleb, arrived
through the garden. They were Indians, Sabæans, Arabs,
Phœnicians; and their slaves toiled under their heavy bales of
merchandise, which were slung on pliant sticks over their shoulders.
The merchants bent low in salaams before the wealthy <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb57" id="pb57" class="pginternal">57</a>]</span>Roman,
bowed down to the earth, kissed the ground which his foot had trodden,
all eager to sell their exotic wares at a profit above the ordinary to
so distinguished a traveller. The Phœnicians made their slaves
spread out Damascus tapestry, but Lucius looked at it with scorn and
the Phœnicians at once rolled up their inferior tapestry. Then,
however, they displayed embroidery from Nineveh and Tyre; and Lucius
turned a little pale, because he thought of Ilia. It was all very
beautiful in hue and very curious in pattern.</p>
<p>“Call Uncle Catullus here,” he said to Tarrar, who was
squatting beside him like a faithful little monkey.</p>
<p>Tarrar hastened to Catullus, who thereupon arrived, sleepily rubbing
his eyes, in a wide silk indoor simar; his grey hair stood in a tangle
around his bald skull.</p>
<p>“Uncle,” said Lucius, aside, “look here, if you
please. Those embroideries from Tyre and Nineveh: I want them. Bargain
for them.”</p>
<p>For Uncle Catullus knew how to bargain. He began by turning up his
nose at the embroideries; and the merchants uttered loud cries of
protest and lifted their hands <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb58" id="pb58" class="pginternal">58</a>]</span>and invoked all the gods. But
Uncle Catullus scornfully shook his head and said:</p>
<p>“No, I won’t buy that trash. Show me other
things.”</p>
<p>Then the Phœnicians showed gold vessels from Tartessus, but
the Arabs offered perfumes and aromatics from Jeddah and Zebid. The
Sabæans displayed wonderful amulets, which bring luck and
blissful dreams: the Indians showed tame, trained snakes, as domestic
pets: the snakes had a small sardonyx encrusted in their heads, where
it had grown into their scaly skin, and they danced on the tips of
their tails, to the piping of the Indians’ flutes. They were
attractive little creatures and did not cost more than one stater
apiece, with the ebony casket in which they were kept; and Lucius
impatiently bought them at once, partly because Tarrar found them so
attractive and grinned where he squatted and looked on while the snakes
danced and twisted one among another.</p>
<p>But at last a Mongolian merchant arrived, with a pale-yellow face
and narrow eyes, which looked as though they were closed, and his hair,
around his shaven head, ended in a pigtail of purple silk, with a
tassel to it. This merchant offered little black balls, to <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb59" id="pb59" class="pginternal">59</a>]</span>be
smoked in peculiar pipes; he asked Lucius to accept a pipe and a couple
of little black pills in a yellow-silk bag, without payment, and to
smoke them when he had the opportunity. The intoxication which they
produced was something very peculiar, said the merchant.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Uncle Catullus had duly succeeded in acquiring the
embroideries from Tyre and Nineveh at a really laughable price and
presented them to his nephew, who of course paid for them in his stead.
But, when Lucius held them in his hands—they were narrow strips
embroidered with Assyrian lions and strange unicorns—he grew sad
and said:</p>
<p>“What use are they to me, after all? Time was when I should
have given them to Ilia as a border for her stola. Tarrar, put the
pretty embroideries away, with the Mongolian pills and all the other
rubbish which I have bought without wanting to: the little gold vases
and the Sabæan amulets.”</p>
<p>“And the dear little snakes, my lord?” asked Tarrar,
with glittering eyes.</p>
<p>“You may keep them ... to play with,” said Lucius,
carelessly.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Caleb had had the cups of <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb60" id="pb60" class="pginternal">60</a>]</span>sherbet handed round.
Uncle Catullus thought it particularly good and considered that
Lucius’ cook ought really to write down this Egyptian recipe; but
Lucius gave his to Tarrar, who scooped up the sherbet greedily with his
black fingers. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb61" id="pb61" class="pginternal">61</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch5"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e806">Chapter V</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Night had fallen over the city, a dark, starless
night. To escape attention, Lucius and Caleb mounted a small,
inconspicuous litter at the back of the diversorium. Caleb sat at
Lucius’ feet with his legs dangling out of the litter, which was
lifted by four powerful Libyans, in preparation for departing at a
trot.</p>
<p>“Have you your dagger, my lord?” asked Caleb.</p>
<p>Yes, Lucius had a dagger in his girdle.</p>
<p>“And are you wearing your Sabæan amulets?”</p>
<p>Yes, Lucius had hung the amulets which he had bought round his neck,
for Caleb was full of confidence in these talismans of his country: the
amulets warded off all ill-luck; Caleb himself wore amulets everywhere,
on his chest and round his waist and even on a narrow gold bangle round
his ankle.</p>
<p>The bearers scurried through Bruchium and past the Gymnasium and the
Museum, as though they had an enemy at their heels. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb62" id="pb62" class="pginternal">62</a>]</span>They
came to a square that lay higher than the Great Harbour; and Lucius
looked out across the quays at the different harbours. Red and green
and yellow lights and signals shone over a variegated, patched throng
of ships and boats and swarming people. But the wonder to Lucius’
eyes was the light-house of Pharos. The nine storeys of the tall marble
monument, stacked one on top of the other like so many cubes, each cube
smaller than the one below, ended in a sort of cupola, where a heap of
burning coal gleamed from immense mirrors and reflectors, which turned
and turned continually, sending bright, broad rays from the summit of
the tower upon the harbours, which they lit up each time, before
stretching into the dark night. Sometimes the wide sheaves of light
struck the high marble bridge of the Heptastadium, which led to the
light-house itself and which at this hour was crowded with women and
idlers.</p>
<p>“My lord,” whispered Caleb, “would you not like to
get out ... and walk ... <i>there</i>? The loveliest women in
Alexandria are strolling yonder ... and you can take your
choice.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb63" id="pb63" class="pginternal">63</a>]</span></p>
<p>Lucius shook his head:</p>
<p>“I want to go to the sibyl,” he said.</p>
<p>“Your lordship is sick,” said Caleb. “Your
lordship is sick with longing and useless pining. The lovely women of
Alexandria would cure your lordship. They have often cured <i>me</i>,
my lord, when I was sick with longing and pining.”</p>
<p>“Longing and pining for what, Caleb?”</p>
<p>“For my country, for Saba, my lord, for Saba, the fairest and
dearest country in the world, my lord, which I have had to leave ...
for the sake of business, my lord, for the sake of business. For we do
no business in Saba.”</p>
<p>The four bearers trotted on. They were now trotting past the
immemorial temple of Serapis, the Serapeum: sombre and grey it lay with
its terraces below the Acropolis; and numbers of other shrines, also
sombre, grey and mysterious, were ranged, with the needles of their
obelisks, around the vast temple.</p>
<p>“These shrines are deserted, my lord,” said Caleb,
“and no longer find worshippers. Even the Serapeum is deserted
... for the temple of Serapis at Canopus. And the modern Alexandrians
hold all this sacred <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb64" id="pb64" class="pginternal">64</a>]</span>quarter in but slight esteem since the
quinquennial games were instituted at Nicopolis. All those who wish to
do honour to Serapis repair to Nicopolis and Canopus. We will go there
too, my lord, and you shall dream dreams full of import high up, on the
roof of the temple.... Look, my lord, here we are, at
Rhacotis....”</p>
<p>The trotting bearers had left the aristocratic quarters. They were
now hurrying through a narrower, sombre street.</p>
<p>“We had better get out here, my lord, and walk,” said
Caleb. “We shall find our litter here when we return.”</p>
<p>Lucius and Caleb alighted. The sombre street was hardly lit, but was
nevertheless swarming with people, including drunken sailors and
fighting beldames.</p>
<p>“It’s very different here, my lord, from the
Heptastadium and Lake Mareotis. Here the people, soldiers and sailors
take their pleasure. Here a dagger is drawn as quick as thought. Here
is nothing but kennels and taverns. But every traveller who wants to
know Alexandria comes here.... Look, my lord, here it is,” said
Caleb, “here!”</p>
<p>They had gone through a network of little <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb65" id="pb65" class="pginternal">65</a>]</span>lanes
and alleys and come to a square. At one corner an old, ragged
philosopher stood arguing and expounding. Around him soldiers, sailors
and wenches gathered, listening attentively to what he said of true
wisdom. When he put out his hand for alms, two soldiers gave him some
coppers, but the others laughed and pelted him with rotten vegetables.
He fled and disappeared, pursued by yelping dogs that bit him in the
skirt of his torn toga.</p>
<p>“Will you not see the Syrian boys dance, my lord?” asked
Caleb. “They dance so beautifully.”</p>
<p>“No, I want to go to the sibyl,” Lucius answered,
impatiently.</p>
<p>“We are close to her dwelling, my lord,” Caleb
declared.</p>
<p>They almost fought their way through the crowd. The men cursed them
because they pushed and the women flung themselves round their necks.
Caleb drew his dagger and raised it threateningly. Other knives were
drawn forthwith. There was a demoniacal yelling and din. But they
succeeded in avoiding bloodshed.</p>
<p>“I want to go to the sibyl,” Lucius repeated, panting
and with his clenched fists <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb66" id="pb66" class="pginternal">66</a>]</span>pushing away two women who were
hanging on to his arms.</p>
<p>Lucius and Caleb now hurried through a reek of wine past the open
brothels and reeking taverns. Caleb stopped in front of a small, narrow
door and knocked. It was opened by a little Greek girl, pretty and
delicate as a Tanagra figurine, with very large black eyes.</p>
<p>“Is Herophila within?” asked Caleb. “A
distinguished foreigner wishes to consult her.”</p>
<p>“I will tell her,” said the girl.</p>
<p>They entered a very narrow little chamber. A woman came from behind
a curtain. She was shrouded in a white veil, like a phantom; she
carried an earthenware lamp; and it was not possible to see if she was
young or old.</p>
<p>“Do you wish to know the future?” she asked, in a hollow
voice.</p>
<p>“No,” said Lucius, “I want to know the past and
the present. I want to know where a girl named Ilia is and how she
vanished from my house. Here is the sandal which she left behind: the
only trace of her. If she ... is dead, can you make her appear before
me, so that I may ask her?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb67" id="pb67" class="pginternal">67</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Yes,” said the sibyl, “I can. For I am descended
from the witch of En-dor.”</p>
<p>“Who was she?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“The witch who made Samuel appear before Saul....”</p>
<p>“I never heard of them,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“And another of my forbears was my honoured namesake,
Herophila of Erythræ.”</p>
<p>“Who was she?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“She was the custodian of the shrine of Apollo Smintheus, the
divine rat-killer. She prophesied to Hecuba the calamity which would
cause the death of her son Paris, whom she was bearing in her
womb.”</p>
<p>“I never heard of her before,” Lucius repeated.
“Tell me if Ilia is dead.”</p>
<p>The sibyl pressed the blue-leather sandal to her head; and her other
hand pressed Lucius’ forehead.</p>
<p>“She is <i>not</i> dead!” she cried, in a voice of
rapture.</p>
<p>“She is <i>not</i> dead?”</p>
<p>“No, Ilia lives!”</p>
<p>“Where? Where is she?”</p>
<p>The sibyl, in a trance, muttered incomprehensible sounds:
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb68" id="pb68" class="pginternal">68</a>]</span></p>
<p>“She appears ... she appears,” she stammered, at
length.</p>
<p>Suddenly, behind her, the curtains parted. There was nothing there
but a smoking tripod. Thick fumes filled the apartment and rolled on
high like a heavy curtain.</p>
<p>“She appears ... she appears,” the sibyl went on
stammering.</p>
<p>Lucius stared breathlessly.</p>
<p>Suddenly, in the fumes, a figure was vaguely outlined as of a dainty
woman, flimsy and thin, a shade that moved to and fro.</p>
<p>“I see her!” cried Lucius. “Ilia, Ilia! Speak one
word to me! Come back to me! I cannot live without you!”</p>
<p>The vision had vanished. The smoke clouded away. The curtains closed
again.</p>
<p>“It is difficult,” said the sibyl, faintly, “to
hold the astral bodies of living persons for more than a single moment.
I can summon the dead for you for a longer time. But Ilia is not
dead.”</p>
<p>“Then where is she?” cried Lucius.</p>
<p>The sibyl now pressed the sandal to her forehead and her other hand
lay on Lucius’ head:</p>
<p>“I see her,” said the sibyl. “She is lying
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb69" id="pb69" class="pginternal">69</a>]</span>in a boat, swooning.... The sea is raging.... Now
rough, bearded men are hurrying her away....”</p>
<p>“She is kidnapped!” cried Lucius. “By
pirates?”</p>
<p>“Yes!” cried the sibyl and fell into a faint.</p>
<p>The pretty Greek girl appeared and said:</p>
<p>“The fee is half a ptolemy, in gold....”</p>
<p>Caleb paid.</p>
<p>Lucius looked down in despair upon the swooning sibyl.</p>
<p>“To-morrow night, my lord,” said the Greek girl, in a
sing-song voice, “Herophila will be able to tell you more ...
where Ilia was taken by the pirates.”</p>
<p>But Lucius clenched his fists; he foamed at the mouth with sudden
anger and roared:</p>
<p>“She has merely read my own thoughts! No more! No
more!”</p>
<p>He glared round him like a madman, drew his dagger and made as
though to fling himself upon the sibyl’s swooning body.</p>
<p>“My lord! My lord!” shouted Caleb, holding him back and
gripping him in his strong arms.</p>
<p>The Greek girl, standing in front of the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb70" id="pb70" class="pginternal">70</a>]</span>fainting
woman, spread wide her arms and cried:</p>
<p>“Do not murder a holy woman, my lord! Do not murder a poor,
holy woman!”</p>
<p>And, as she stood thus, Lucius saw that she was like the shade of
Ilia ... and he burst into sobs. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb71" id="pb71" class="pginternal">71</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch6"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e982">Chapter VI</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Those were sad days. Lucius would lie on his bed,
sobbing like a child, then rise suddenly, in transports of rage, tear
his clothes or take up a stool and hurl it at a marble statue, which
fell down in dust and fragments. He showed Thrasyllus the door; and
Uncle Catullus kept out of the way. Lucius had ended by banging Tarrar
against a table; and the little slave had a deep wound in his forehead.
Caleb, who was a good hand at doctoring, had himself bandaged
Tarrar’s head.</p>
<p>Anxiously, in the palm-garden, the travelling merchants whispered
about the wealthy Roman, who was sick with sorrow, and Uncle Catullus
whispered in their company. Thrasyllus consoled himself by visiting the
libraries of the Museum and the Serapeum. Lucius refused to hear any
music. He did not leave his bed. He did not eat. He did not sleep. He
looked unshaven, lean-cheeked and hollow-eyed, as one who was
desperately sick.</p>
<p>They were sad days. The first charm of <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb72" id="pb72" class="pginternal">72</a>]</span>Alexandria was past; and
Lucius cursed his journey, his whole life and everybody. In his
impotent pain he groaned, sobbed and raved. Master Ghizla ordained
silence and quiet around his rooms. Not a sandal creaked, not a voice
sounded.</p>
<p>Lucius listened to this stillness. It was after luncheon, which
Uncle Catullus had taken alone with Thrasyllus. And in the burning
sunny stillness of that glowing June Lucius suddenly heard a child
sobbing.</p>
<p>He rose from his couch. The sobs came from the back-garden; and
Lucius raised the curtain and looked out. There, listening for his
master’s gong, sat Tarrar, huddled, like a little monkey, in a
gaudy coat. He wore a napkin round his head as a bandage. And he was
weeping, with little sobs, as if he were in great sorrow.</p>
<p>“Tarrar!” cried Lucius.</p>
<p>The little slave started up:</p>
<p>“My lord!” he answered.</p>
<p>And he rose and approached with comical reverence and sobbed.</p>
<p>“Tarrar,” said Lucius, “why are you weeping? Are
you in pain?”</p>
<p>“No, my lord,” said Tarrar. “I beg pardon, my
lord, for weeping. I must not weep <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb73" id="pb73" class="pginternal">73</a>]</span>in your august presence. I
humbly beg your pardon, my lord. But I am weeping because ... because
... because I am so unhappy.”</p>
<p>“And why are you unhappy? Because I struck you? Because you
are in pain? Because you fell and made a hole in your head?”</p>
<p>“No, my lord,” said Tarrar, trying to control himself,
“not because you struck me. I am your little slave, my lord, and
you have the right to strike me. And also not because I am in pain:
there is only a little burning pain now, for Caleb bandaged my head
this morning with cool ointment. The hole is not so very deep either;
and, when it is healed, the scar will remind me that I belong to you,
my lord, and that I am your little slave.”</p>
<p>“But then why are you weeping, Tarrar, and why are you
unhappy?”</p>
<p>“I am weeping, my lord,” Tarrar began,
“because....”</p>
<p>And then he could restrain himself no longer, comical, respectful
little monkey that he was, and sobbed aloud. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb74" id="pb74" class="pginternal">74</a>]</span></p>
<p>Lucius laid his hand on the boy’s curly head:</p>
<p>“Why are you weeping, child?”</p>
<p>“Because the snakes wouldn’t dance any more!”
sobbed Tarrar, in despair. “Because one of them is dead and the
other gone, for it crept out of its skin and left its skin behind!
Because, whatever pains I took to pipe the magic tune on the
flute—in the garden behind the house, so as not to make a noise
or disturb you—the snakes would <i>not</i> dance any more ... as
they did when the merchant piped to them! And because now ... one of
the snakes is dead, my lord, and the other crept away out of its
skin!”</p>
<p>And Tarrar, overcome with misery, sobbed aloud and showed his master
the snake and the ebony casket, from which a skin hung, with a square
piece of glass gummed to the head.</p>
<p>Lucius gave a melancholy smile. Was he not himself miserable, like
Tarrar, because he too had been robbed of his plaything? And he
said:</p>
<p>“Come with me, Tarrar.”</p>
<p>And he took the little slave by the hand and led him to his room.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb75" id="pb75" class="pginternal">75</a>]</span></p>
<p>He sat down, with Tarrar standing in front of him. Then he said:</p>
<p>“Tarrar, I am sorry for hurting you so badly. Forgive me,
Tarrar.”</p>
<p>But Tarrar shook his head:</p>
<p>“It is not for me to forgive you, my lord,” he said,
earnestly, with great, dim eyes. “You are the master.”</p>
<p>“Tarrar,” Lucius continued, “when we are back in
Rome, you shall be free. I will set you free. And you shall no longer
be a little slave. But you shall go to school, to the freedmen’s
college. And learn all sorts of things. And become very clever, like
Thrasyllus. And I will give you money. And you will be able to do
whatever you please.”</p>
<p>Tarrar was a little taken aback:</p>
<p>“You are very kind, my lord,” he said. “But, if I
go to school, who will fold your clothes? And listen for your gong? You
are not driving me away, my lord, because I was so unhappy? I would
rather stay with you, my lord, I would rather remain your little slave
... and I will never again be so disrespectful as to weep.... I would
rather remain your stupid little slave.”</p>
<p>“You shall be free, Tarrar. But you will <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb76" id="pb76" class="pginternal">76</a>]</span>be
allowed to serve me all the same.”</p>
<p>“I don’t want to be free, my lord. What use is freedom
to me? I am your little slave. I should always be your little slave
just as before.”</p>
<p>“Then ask me something else, Tarrar, something that you would
like very much.”</p>
<p>Tarrar grinned with his white teeth through his tears:</p>
<p>“May I tell you, my lord?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>Tarrar hesitated. Then he said, shyly:</p>
<p>“Two other little dancing snakes, my lord.”</p>
<p>Lucius laughed softly:</p>
<p>“Child!” he said. “I will give you two other
little snakes! But I fear that those also will refuse to dance as only
the Indian merchant can make them dance.”</p>
<p>“I fear so too,” said Tarrar, reflecting. “The
snake that is still alive has crept back to the merchant, I expect, out
of the skin which it left behind it. I also fear that the new snakes
would refuse to dance.... Then I would rather have nothing, my lord. I
don’t want anything. If only I may serve you.”</p>
<p>“Then get everything ready to shave <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb77" id="pb77" class="pginternal">77</a>]</span>me ...
and tell the slaves to prepare the bath.”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lord,” said Tarrar, with alacrity. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb78" id="pb78" class="pginternal">78</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch7"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1089">Chapter VII</h2>
<div class="epigraph">
<div class="lgouter">
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Mother of Eros, hear thy slave!</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line xd20e1097">“Child of the foam, great goddess of
love,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Aphrodite, look down from above!</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who dost madden the gods with
desire,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who fulfillest men’s hearts with
thy fire,</p>
<p class="line">All but the heart of my lord that I crave,</p>
<p class="line">Hark to thy slave!</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Spill this hot blood that courses in vain for
him,</p>
<p class="line">Darken these eyes that are heavy with pain for him,</p>
<p class="line">Smite the parched lips that he sees but to spurn
them,</p>
<p class="line">The hands stretched in love ... take them, break them
and burn them!</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Then, in the place where lately he strode,</p>
<p class="line">Mingle mine ash with the dust of the road;</p>
<p class="line">Thus, though I win not a glance from his eye,</p>
<p class="line">Thus, though as ever he pass me by</p>
<p class="line">Careless, unseeing, at least my lord’s heel</p>
<p class="line">Cannot but touch me, at least I shall feel</p>
<p class="line">The embrace of his foot; and his sandall’d
sole</p>
<p class="line">Shall kiss my dust and make me whole.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Then let the heart that he has
press’d,</p>
<p class="line">The ashen lips by him caressed</p>
<p class="line">Sink low in the lowly dust of the road</p>
<p class="line">Lest another tread where late he trod.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Mother of Eros, hear thy slave!</p>
</div>
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb79" id="pb79" class="pginternal">79</a>]</span>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line xd20e1097">“Child of the foam, great goddess of
love,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Aphrodite, look down from above!</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who dost madden the gods with
desire,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who fulfillest men’s hearts with
thy fire,</p>
<p class="line">All but the heart of my lord that I crave,</p>
<p class="line">Hark to thy slave!”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Cora’s song rang through the falling night. Her
clear voice, tinkling as though with little golden bells, at first soft
and hushed, rose throbbing in passion and then broke like a crystal ray
and melted in mournfulness and plaintive prayer.</p>
<p>The shadows lay heaped under the palm-trees. Outside the doors of
their apartments, in the galleries of the diversorium, sat the
travelling merchants, squatting or lying on mat or rug, listening.
Uncle Catullus lay in a hammock and Thrasyllus sat beside him and
looked up at the stars, which were beginning to show like silver
daisies in wide, blue meadows.</p>
<p>“You have sung beautifully, Cora,” said Uncle Catullus
to the slave, who was sitting on the ground with the four-stringed harp
before her.</p>
<p>“Thank you, my lord,” said the slave.</p>
<p>“Why not call me uncle?” said Catullus,
good-naturedly.</p>
<p>“I should not dare,” said Cora, smiling. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb80" id="pb80" class="pginternal">80</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Ilia used to call me uncle.”</p>
<p>“I am not Ilia, my lord.”</p>
<p>Tarrar appeared in the pillared portico.</p>
<p>But his appearance was a surprise. For Tarrar, no longer bandaged,
looked like a little savage: he wore his Libyan festive garment; a
girdle of feathers hung round his waist; he was crowned with a
head-dress of feathers. And he stood grinning.</p>
<p>“Great gods, Tarrar!” cried Uncle Catullus, with a
start. “What have you done to yourself? You look like a little
cannibal! You frighten me! What’s happening?”</p>
<p>“We are going to Canopus, my lord, to-night!” cried
Tarrar, jubilantly. “My Lord Lucius lets you know that we are all
going to Canopus this very night! Here is his lordship
himself!”</p>
<p>And Tarrar pointed triumphantly to Lucius, who appeared upon the
threshold. Cora had risen and now curtseyed low to the ground, with
outstretched arms.</p>
<p>Lucius looked like a young Egyptian god. He wore an Egyptian robe of
striped byssus, with a border of hieroglyphics worked in heavy
embroidery and precious stones; his legs were encased in hose of gold
tissue; about his head was an Egyptian coif, like <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb81" id="pb81" class="pginternal">81</a>]</span>that of
a sphinx, with broad, projecting, striped bands, which fell to his
shoulders; he glittered with strange jewels and was wrapped from head
to foot in fine gold net like a transparent cloak, like an immaterial
shroud. And he approached with a smile, brilliantly, superhumanly
beautiful.</p>
<p>“Great sacred gods! Great sacred gods!” exclaimed Uncle
Catullus.</p>
<p>He rose; Thrasyllus rose too; and the merchants gathered round and,
in salaam upon salaam, showed their admiration for the dazzling
stranger.</p>
<p>“Lucius, what possesses you? What is happening? Have you
turned into Serapis himself?”</p>
<p>“No, uncle,” smiled Lucius, “I am merely clad in
ceremonial raiment because I want to go to Canopus and dream on the
roof of the temple of Serapis. It is the great feast; and
Caleb”—he pointed to Caleb stepping
forward—“has persuaded me to go this night in state to
Canopus. You are coming too, uncle; you also, Thrasyllus; we shall all
go, all my freedmen and slaves. Caleb will see about a boat.”</p>
<p>A violent and feverish excitement followed. Slaves, male and female,
streamed <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb82" id="pb82" class="pginternal">82</a>]</span>from every side of the diversorium, rejoicing and
clasping their hands in amazement.</p>
<p>“When any princely noble, such as his lordship,” Caleb
explained, “goes to Canopus, to the feast of Serapis thrice holy,
he goes in the greatest state, with all his household to accompany
him.”</p>
<p>“So I am going too, as I belong to the household?”
exclaimed Uncle Catullus. “Only ... am I to rig myself out like
that? And where shall I find such a sumptuous raiment?”</p>
<p>“My lord,” said Caleb, “you will find everything
ready in your chamber. You too, Master Thrasyllus.”</p>
<p>Uncle Catullus hurried away, clasping his fat stomach in his two
hands. You never knew where you were with that Lucius! For days and
days he had been mourning and sobbing and lamenting; he had remained
invisible and had eaten nothing ... and there, there he appeared,
decked out like a young god, and wanted to go to Canopus, to dream on
the roof of the temple!</p>
<p>“And I had just been reckoning on a quiet evening, because I
feel that I’ve overloaded my stomach!” moaned Uncle
Catullus. “Egypt will be the death of me!” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb83" id="pb83" class="pginternal">83</a>]</span></p>
<p>Lights everywhere, links and torches; fever and gaiety everywhere,
because one and all were going to Canopus that night. What a surprise!
Their lord was no longer sick! It was the great feast! It was the feast
of Serapis! The feast of dreams! The water-festival and the
boat-festival! It was the summer festival of Canopus!</p>
<p>Vettius and Rufus, the two stewards, gave orders here, there and
everywhere. One and all, they said, were to deck themselves in festive
garb. Ione, the old female slave, who had charge of the harpists and
dancers, was given leave to buy from the merchants whatever she needed,
veils and ornaments.</p>
<p>“We are going to Canopus, we are going to Canopus!”
cried the women, in joyful chorus. “Quick, Ione, hand me the
poppy-rouge! Here, a stick of antimony! I want a blue veil, Ione, and
blue lotus-flowers for my hair! Quick, quick, Ione! The master is
ready!”</p>
<p>“We are going to Canopus, we are going to Canopus!” Cora
cried, joyfully, with the rest. “My lord was like a young god, he
looked like Serapis himself! Ione, I must have a net of gold thread and
a dreaming-veil of gold thread and pink water-lilies for <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb84" id="pb84" class="pginternal">84</a>]</span>my hair!
I want a wreath of pink water-lilies!”</p>
<p>Lucius from afar beheld this stir, in the reflection of the lamps
and torches in the night. Slaves were running to and fro; litters were
prepared. He thought only of Ilia. He wanted to wrap himself in the
dreaming-veil and to lie on the temple-roof and dream where Ilia was,
where she had been carried ... by the pirates. And he stood like a
priest, gazing solemnly before him. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb85" id="pb85" class="pginternal">85</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch8"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1232">Chapter VIII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">During those evenings of the summer festival,
Alexandria was lighted more brilliantly than Rome itself. The town
glittered with hundreds of lights, lamps, lanterns, torches and links;
it glittered in its harbours, where the blinding sheaves of light
floated from the dome of the light-house; it glittered in its two main
streets, which intersected each other; it glittered in the colonnades
of the Museum and the Gymnasium, colonnades and stadia themselves
restlessly teeming, up to where the multitude were making merry for the
festival.</p>
<p>But above all it glittered over Lake Mareotis and the Canopus Canal.
The splendid villas on the lake were bright with many-coloured lanterns
and balls of fire; the temple of Aphrodite, on the eyot, was
silhouetted in flaring lines; and over the golden waters of the lake
itself the illuminated boats pressed and crowded, filled with song,
filled with dance, full of colour, gladness and joy; streamers flapped
and rugs trailed over <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb86" id="pb86" class="pginternal">86</a>]</span>the sides of the boats down to the water.</p>
<p>Through the lighted streets the bearers hurried and thronged with
the litters towards Lake Mareotis. They hurried from the diversorium,
with the harpists and the dancing-girls and a great procession of
slaves in festive raiment. An army of freedmen followed on horses and
mules; and the passers-by pointed to the imposing procession, evidently
the household of a very wealthy Roman who was going to Canopus to
dream.</p>
<p>The procession reached a landing-stage on the lake. Here a great
barge lay moored, a thalamegus which Caleb had succeeded in hiring at
the last moment for a vast sum of money. The thalamegus was painted
blue and gilded, with blue-and-gilt oars, which stuck out like so many
swan’s-legs. Caleb had had her covered with tapestry and adorned
with wreaths of flowers and festoons of leaves. The silver statue of
Aphrodite stood on the prow, with incense burning before it. The troop
of slaves, male and female, and freedmen, with Vettius and Rufus,
hastened on board to await the master’s coming.</p>
<p>A dense multitude pressed round to look on greedily. Now a Roman
litter approached, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb87" id="pb87" class="pginternal">87</a>]</span>recognizable by its square shape; yet another
and the master alighted, with the aid of his slaves, male and female.
He was accompanied by an old, corpulent kinsman and a grave tutor.</p>
<p>“He’s going dreaming! He’s going dreaming!”
cried the populace. “See, he has his dreaming-veil on! He looks
like Serapis himself!”</p>
<p>Beggars crowded round the travellers:</p>
<p>“Divine lord and exalted prince! Image of Horus, the son of
Osiris! May Serapis send you good dreams! May Serapis load you with
blessings! May he keep bad dreams locked far from you, in the shadowy
underworld!”</p>
<p>The stewards distributed money among the beggars. Lucius had gone on
board. The slave-girls scattered flowers before his feet as he
walked.</p>
<p>The song of the rowers was heard from the body of the boat. The
creaking ropes were cast off; the barge glided towards the middle of
the lake. She gleamed with blue, green and yellow lights and left a
trail of brightness in her wake; the water was bright around her. On
the banks the villas and palaces of light stood in gardens of light.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb88" id="pb88" class="pginternal">88</a>]</span></p>
<p>Hundreds of other barges were gliding slowly in the same direction.
Above the monotonous drone of the rowers’ song rang ballads and
hymns. The music of citharas was heard in descending chords; the harps
rang out; the notes of double flutes quavered through the evening air
with a magic intoxication of melody.</p>
<p>The waters of the lake stood high. It was the month when the kindly
Nile stepped outside its banks with a moist foot and overflowed the
Delta. The golden waters of the lake lapped higher than the marble
steps of the villas down which the brilliant hetairæ descended,
holding the lappets of their veils, to take their seats on the cushions
of their barges.</p>
<p>Flowers fell on the water, in unison with the notes of hymn and
song. All the craft, hundreds and hundreds, large and small, barges and
coracles, square rafts and canoes, pressed gently forward towards the
entrance of the Canopian Canal. On the banks were thousands of idlers
and spectators, all the people of Alexandria.</p>
<p>The vessels glided to the harmony of the twanged strings into the
broad canal. It was very full of water; the banks were <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb89" id="pb89" class="pginternal">89</a>]</span>flooded.
Reeds tall as a man, biblos and cyamos, rose like pillars, blossoming
during this month with thousands of waving plumes: the leaves of the
biblos were long and bending over, as though each were languidly
broken; those of the cyamos were round as scales and goblet-deep,
stacked one above the other along the stems, like cups.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1270" id="xd20e1270src">1</a>
In the light on the barges, golden patches glowed among the stalks; and
the reeds and rushes blossomed up as though out of molten gold.</p>
<p>Here lay the Canopian harbour, here the suburb of Eleusis; and the
canal split into two branches. The narrower channel led to Schedia, on
the Nile; the broader led past Nicopolis to Canopus.</p>
<p>Beyond stretched the sea, wide and blue. Only a narrow strip of land
separated it from the canal; and it lay boundless under a thousand
twinkling stars.</p>
<p>“Lucius,” said Thrasyllus, sitting spell-bound at the
feet of the young Roman, who sat on a raised throne and gazed in front
of him like a priest, full of longing for his dream of that night,
“Lucius, my Lord Catullus, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb90" id="pb90" class="pginternal">90</a>]</span>look! We have passed Nicopolis,
with its amphitheatre and stadium; and yonder lies Taposiris, with Cape
Zephyrium; and on a height I can see the temple of Aphrodite
Arsinoe.”</p>
<p>“I see,” said Lucius, turning his eyes towards the
temple, which was lit with lines of fire and rose above the water like
a mansion in Olympus.</p>
<p>“I see,” echoed Uncle Catullus, seated by Lucius’
side.</p>
<p>“I was reading,” Thrasyllus explained, “that at
the same place where that temple now stands there once stood the city
of Thonis, named after the king who hospitably entreated Menelaus and
Helen. Homer mentions it and speaks of the secret herbs and precious
balsams which Helen received from Queen Polydamna, Thonis’
spouse.”</p>
<p>“You know everything, Thrasyllus,” said Uncle Catullus,
warmly, “and it is a joy to travel with you.”</p>
<p>“Tell the slave from Cos to sing the Hymn to Aphrodite as we
row past the goddess’ temple,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>Thrasyllus went to Cora and communicated the master’s order.
Forthwith a group of singers and dancers rose to their feet.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb91" id="pb91" class="pginternal">91</a>]</span>Cora herself struck the resounding chords. And she
sang:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Mother of Eros, hear thy slave!</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line xd20e1097">“Child of the foam, great goddess of
love,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Aphrodite, look down from above!</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who dost madden the gods with
desire,</p>
<p class="line xd20e1097">Thou, who fulfillest men’s hearts with
thy fire,</p>
<p class="line">All but the heart of my lord that I crave,</p>
<p class="line">Hark to <span class="corr" title="Source: shy" id="xd20e1313">thy</span> slave!”</p>
</div>
</div>
<p class="first">She stood as one inspired while she sang, with her
fingers on the chords, facing the temple. Around her the girls danced
to the song. The movements of their lithe bodies, light as the ripple
of a silken scarf in the breeze, met and dissolved in picture after
picture with each word of the song. The singer’s voice swelled
crystal-clear. From the bank of the canal, from the open houses, on the
temple-steps the people listened to her song. In the tall reeds lay
smaller boats, wherein a man and woman embraced in love. Their hands
thrust aside the yielding stems; and their smiles glanced at Cora.</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“All but the heart of my lord that I crave,</p>
<p class="line">Hark to thy slave!”</p>
</div>
<p class="first">the other singers now sang after her.</p>
<p>“She sings well,” said Lucius. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb92" id="pb92" class="pginternal">92</a>]</span></p>
<p>Cora heard him. She blushed crimson between the great rose-coloured
flowers at her temples. But she behaved as though she had heard
nothing. And she sat down quietly among her companions, at the foot of
the silver statue of Aphrodite.</p>
<p>The barge glided on slowly with the others. From all of them, in
turns, came music. The water of the flooding canal was like a broad
golden mirror. On the bank, between the stalks of the tall reeds, the
open taverns and brothels rose, wreathed in flowers, as from an
enchanted lake. The women in them beckoned and waved with long
lotus-stems.</p>
<p>But the barges glided on, towards Canopus. They were all going to
the temple of Serapis. Not until after the dreams would the brothels
and taverns be visited. The orgy was to come after the dream.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb93" id="pb93" class="pginternal">93</a>]</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<hr class="fnsep"/>
<p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1270src" id="xd20e1270">1</a></span> These
cyamos-leaves were actually used for kitchen-utensils by the people of
Alexandria; and their sale provided a regular livelihood.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch9"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1337">Chapter IX</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">In the strange bright summer night of light, lit by
the sheen of the stars and the glow of the lamps, Canopus rose amid its
slender obelisks and its spreading palm-trees. The barges lay moored to
the long quay, one beside the other. One solemn train of pilgrims after
another flowed down the street to the temple of Serapis. The town was
alive with the whisper of music and aglow with illumination.</p>
<p>It was mid-night. From the temple of Serapis heavy gong-strokes
sounded, like a divine, golden thunder rolling at regular intervals
under the stars. The singing processions, bathed in torchlight,
streamed towards the temple.</p>
<p>There was a wide avenue paved with large, square stones. This
avenue, or dromos, led to the sanctuary, the temenos, along a double
row of immense basalt sphinxes, half woman, half lioness; half man,
half bull. They were drawn up like superhuman sentinels that had turned
to stone; and their <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb94" id="pb94" class="pginternal">94</a>]</span>great human faces stared raptly into the
night. In between the sphinxes, the coloured lamps and lanterns
blossomed like lotus-flowers, glowing blue, red and yellow.</p>
<p>The processions streamed into the dromos at pilgrims’ pace.
Through the dromos they reached the first propylæum, then the
second, the third, the fourth. These consisted of a gigantic series of
heavy pylons, painted with hieroglyphics: a veritable forest of
pylon-trunks rising in serried ranks of frowning columns and crowned
with heavy architraves which seemed to support the starry realm of the
summer night itself. Through these endless rows of pillars the dense
multitude of pilgrims in search of their dreams marched to the music of
hymns. It marched with its steady, slow, regular, religious tread. And
monotonous as the rhythm of its march was the melody of its hymn, borne
upon ever the same harp-chords.</p>
<p>Lucius’ procession marched with the others. He walked gravely,
with Catullus by his side; Thrasyllus followed; the slaves, male and
female, followed. In front of him strode his musicians, singers and
dancers. And Cora’s voice rose only a little higher in the
ever-repeated hymn to the god Serapis. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb95" id="pb95" class="pginternal">95</a>]</span></p>
<p>The temple itself produced a sense of infinity. An immense
fore-court, or pronaos, soared on high with its pillars, a forest of
pylons crowned by the roof, with its painted hieroglyphics. The pronaos
gave admittance to the sanctuary, the holy of holies, an immeasurable
empty space, without image, without altar, without anything.
Nevertheless as it were a mysterious sanctity descended here, because
of the height, the impressive, colossal dimensions. The
“wings,” or pteres, the two side-walls, sculptured with
symbolic bas-reliefs, painted gold, azure and scarlet, approached each
other with slanting lines in a mystic perspective, where a cloud of
fragrance hovered like a conflagration. Behind this the holy of holies
lost itself, the abode of the god, of Serapis; invisible the statue. A
swarm of acolytes, zacori and neocori, were officiating on ascending
stairs, in worship before close-drawn hyacinth curtains.</p>
<p>The processions divided themselves along the wings, the side-walls,
as directed by the temple-keepers’ wands. It was as though a
broad stream were dividing into two rivers. At the end of the wings,
behind the holy of holies, flights of stairs widened in the open night,
leading to terraces, the one ever higher <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb96" id="pb96" class="pginternal">96</a>]</span>than the other, so that
they could not be overlooked. The golden gong-strokes solemnly rolled
and thundered, echoing heavily and loudly.</p>
<p>Over the terraces, in a constant round, up and down, marched the
chief priests, the hieropsalts, the hieroscopes, the hierogrammats, the
pastophors, the sphagists and the stolists. The hieropsalts sang the
hymns to the sacred harps; the hieroscopes prophesied from the entrails
of victims; the hierogrammats guarded the secrets of the Hermetic
wisdom; the pastophors carried the images of Anubis, with the
dog’s head, in silver boats; the sphagists were the sacrificial
priests; the stolists served the sacred images, adorned them, tended
them with ever clean and perfumed hands. But among the hierogrammats
strode the prophets. They had beheld the godhead face to face; they
knew the past and the future, they knew the meaning of the sacred
dreams. They were very holy; and the oldest of them were most holy.
Whenever they approached, the people sank to the ground and kissed the
pavement, with hands uplifted.</p>
<p>The sacred hour approached, the hour when Serapis would send the
sacred dreams <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb97" id="pb97" class="pginternal">97</a>]</span>from heaven, out of the sun itself, when all the
procession would have streamed in, when the gates of the dromos would
have slammed with their ponderous monolithic doors, when the last
gong-stroke would clatter away in the sacred night.</p>
<p>From the terraces the town, the canal, and the lake lay visible as
in one golden shimmer of lights. But on the terraces themselves
suddenly an incredible stillness reigned. Not a voice, not a rustle
sounded from out of that multitude of thousands. And on the granite
pavement the pilgrims were stretched one beside the other.</p>
<p>In between the rows the temple-keepers moved, the neocori. And they
bent incessantly over the pilgrims and covered them with the
dreaming-nets and -veils, while zacori slung the censers. A heavy,
intoxicating perfume of almost stifling aromatic vapour was wafted
through the air.</p>
<p>Suddenly, through the silence, the harps of the hieropsalts struck
the sacred chord.</p>
<p>There was a short hymn, one single phrase, which melted away.</p>
<p>On the vast terraces the multitude of the thousands of pilgrims lay
motionless under nets and veils, their eyes closed. Not a <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb98" id="pb98" class="pginternal">98</a>]</span>sound
came from the illuminated city. The sacred silence reigned wide and
mystic, fraught with terror, over the sea, along the starry sky, over
the city and the temple. For Serapis, invisible, was rising from the
underworld, to bring the dreams.</p>
<p>He rose in a cloud of dreams, out of the sacred, subterranean Hell,
where he reigns even as Osiris reigns in high Heaven. He is Osiris
himself; between him and Osiris there is no difference. He is two.
While Osiris is the benevolent Almighty above, he is the benevolent
Almighty below. He opposes Typhon, even as Osiris combated Typhon.
Victory falls to him in the end, even as it did to Osiris.</p>
<p>Now he rises, in the cloud of dreams. For it is his feast, the feast
of his kindly waters, which he pours in summer rains from the sacred
vessels wherewith the dog’s-head of Anubis, his watchman, servant
and comrade, is crowned, the waters which he pours into the sacred
stream, so that it may flood sacred Egypt. Now he rises in the cloud of
dreams.</p>
<p>The earth splits and Serapis rises from the subterranean Hell. He is
everything, even as Osiris is. He is feminine, Neith, the beginning,
and masculine, Ammon, eternity. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb99" id="pb99" class="pginternal">99</a>]</span>He is what the last will be. And
he cannot be other than the benefactor. He makes the dreams hover like
butterflies around the foreheads of those who believe in him. His
healing power makes whole the sick. He pours the secret of that healing
into the minds of the servants of sufferers who shall dream in their
masters’ stead. His dreams advise what must be done or left
undone to achieve prosperity, fortune, consideration, happiness and
love.</p>
<p>And he will make Lusius dream where to find a beloved woman who has
disappeared....</p>
<p>In the silence the young Roman lies, covered with a gold network,
like a precious mummy, straight out, his arms beside his body, his eyes
shut. Near him lie all his followers.</p>
<p>The cloud of the perfumes is wafted over their eyes reverently
closed under the veils.</p>
<p>The sacred silence continues, hour after hour, unbroken....
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb100" id="pb100" class="pginternal">100</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch10"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1396">Chapter X</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Had Lucius slept? Had he dreamed? Had the fragrant
cloud drugged his senses? Had a strange mystic power spread over him?
Had Serapis descended upon him? Had the dreams surrounded him?</p>
<p>It seemed to him that a golden thunder roused him from his heavy,
motionless lethargy. The gong-strokes rolled through the temple and far
away into the starry night. Harp-chords sounded, a hymn was intoned. He
felt his veil wet with thick-rising dew....</p>
<p>Round and round the terraces, singing, moved the long procession of
the priests. It was still night. Everywhere around Lucius the dreamers
arose, drunk with sleep and dreaming. In the reflections of the lamps
and torches their faces were ghostly, spiritualized as after a long
prayer, after protracted adoration and ecstasy, wherein their thoughts,
desires and souls had been refined.</p>
<p>On the topmost terrace, round which the whole city shimmered visibly
with light—<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb101" id="pb101" class="pginternal">101</a>]</span>on the one side the nocturnal blue of the
sea, on the other the silvery forking of the Nile’s mouths
through the Delta—the learned hierogrammats, the keepers of the
sacred writings, sat each on his throne. In their hands they held
unrolled the sacred scrolls, whose hieroglyphics gave answer to all
things. Temple-slaves behind them lifted high the coloured lanterns. In
front of them the multitudinous dreamers thronged.</p>
<p>Great was the thronging. The dreamers wanted to know the
interpretation of their dreams. But those who had dreamed were so many
that the priests did not answer save with a few words full of dark
meaning.</p>
<p>Many, disappointed, went down the terraces. Orgy awaited them in the
taverns and brothels along the canal....</p>
<p>Lucius had risen, in the midst of all his followers. He stood stiff,
motionless, veiled in the gold net, like a god entranced.</p>
<p>“Lucius,” Thrasyllus asked, “my dear child and
master, tell me: have you dreamed?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” replied Lucius, in a trance.</p>
<p>“I too,” said Uncle Catullus. “It was a nightmare,
<i>most</i> unpleasant! I had dined too heavily. My stomach was
overloaded. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb102" id="pb102" class="pginternal">102</a>]</span>And I am now shivering with this chilly dew.
Egypt is <i>most</i> interesting, but Egypt will positively be the
death of me!”</p>
<p>Caleb had approached:</p>
<p>“My gracious lord,” said Caleb, “your Sabæan
amulets have no doubt inspired you with a favourable dream. You must
have your dream expounded. But not by the hierogrammats.... Look, the
dreamers are crowding in front of them. There is no reaching them. You
must have your dream expounded by a most holy prophet, by Amphris, the
centenarian.... Come with me, let me lead you to him....” He took
Lucius by the hand. “It costs half a talent, no less,” said
Caleb. “Thirty minæ, my lord. But then Amphris will expound
your dreams for you, Amphris, the holy Amphris. The hierogrammats
charge ten or twenty drachmæ. But they can never tell it as the
holy Amphris, the prophet does. This is where he sits enthroned, my
lord.”</p>
<p>They were standing in front of a small pyramid, on one of the upper
terraces. Two sphinxes beside the narrow door lay like mysterious stone
sentinels. Temple-keepers guarded the gate.</p>
<p>“The most holy Amphris?” Caleb asked. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb103" id="pb103" class="pginternal">103</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Forty minæ,” said one of the priests.</p>
<p>“Why not a talent right away?” grumbled Caleb.</p>
<p>“Forty minæ,” repeated the priest.</p>
<p>Caleb took the gold coins from the long purse at his girdle and
slipped them into the priest’s hand:</p>
<p>“Enter, my lord,” he said, pointing to the open
door.</p>
<p>Lucius entered. Seated on a throne was an old man who looked like a
god of age and wisdom. Lucius himself was as beautiful as a young god.
A strange light, as of soft moons, shone from blue globes. Lucius bowed
to the ground, fell upon his knees and kissed the floor. He remained in
this position.</p>
<p>“Did Serapis pass over you, my son?”</p>
<p>“Yes, holy father.”</p>
<p>“What did he make you see, in your dreams?”</p>
<p>“The woman whom I love....”</p>
<p>The prophet had laid his long, thin, transparent hand on the
dreamer’s head:</p>
<p>“But who did not love you,” he said, gently and
quietly.</p>
<p>“How do you know, holy father?... I saw the pirates who
kidnapped her....”</p>
<p>“But by whom she was not kidnapped....” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb104" id="pb104" class="pginternal">104</a>]</span></p>
<p>“How do you know, holy father?”</p>
<p>“And by whom she was not sold as a slave.”</p>
<p>“Where is she then, O father?”</p>
<p>“What did Serapis make you see in the dream?”</p>
<p>Lucius sobbed:</p>
<p>“I do not know, father.... I saw her and ... those who
kidnapped her.”</p>
<p>“How many were they?”</p>
<p>“Many.”</p>
<p>“Old and young?”</p>
<p>“No, they resembled one another like brothers, like
doubles.”</p>
<p>“Because they were not many.”</p>
<p>“Not many?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“How many were they, father?”</p>
<p>“They were ... <i>one</i>.”</p>
<p>“Not more?”</p>
<p>“They were <i>one</i>,” repeated the prophet. “My
son, your soul is sick. It is sick with sorrow and love. Love is
strong, but wisdom is stronger. Gather wisdom, my son. My child, I can
see into your soul. I see it lying tortured and trembling.”</p>
<p>“There is no comfort if I do not find her!”</p>
<p>“There is comfort. Isis seeking for Osiris <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb105" id="pb105" class="pginternal">105</a>]</span>recovered all the pieces of his body except that
piece which fructified her. And yet she found comfort, in the
end.”</p>
<p>“Give me comfort, holy father.”</p>
<p>“I am wisdom, child, and you are young. Serve wisdom, but
honour love.”</p>
<p>“Father, why did the pirates resemble one another?”</p>
<p>“Because they were one.”</p>
<p>“One pirate?”</p>
<p>“One pirate.”</p>
<p>“Where is Ilia, father?”</p>
<p>“My son, even my wisdom does not tell me that whereof you have
not dreamed. You dreamed of many pirates, who resembled one another
like doubles. There was one pirate, my child.”</p>
<p>“Who was he?”</p>
<p>“Did Serapis conjure up his image before you?”</p>
<p>“I no longer see it.”</p>
<p>“Then go in peace. And let love and wisdom comfort
you.”</p>
<p>Lucius went. On the threshold of the pyramid he met an hetaira. She
glittered like an idol in her ceremonial garb, sewn with jewels, and
looked at him with painted eyes. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb106" id="pb106" class="pginternal">106</a>]</span></p>
<p>“It’s Tamyris, my lord,” said Caleb. “She is
going to consult Amphris. She has paid a talent! Has Amphris
interpreted your dream? The door-keeper, who also is wise, has
interpreted mine for me! And for only five drachmæ.”</p>
<p>“One pirate! One pirate!” murmured Lucius.</p>
<p>And he clenched his fists, impotently....</p>
<p>The multitude streamed away along the terraces. The barges glided
back on the canal, in the night.</p>
<p>And constantly, near the pleasure-houses and taverns, the vessels
stopped and the dreamers alighted.</p>
<p>Here mead flowed and foaming golden beer and heavy Mareotis wines
and the intoxicating liqueurs of Napata. Here the naked women, who
beckoned with lotus-stalks, twisted in the dance.</p>
<p>“Back!” cried Lucius. “Back to
Alexandria!”</p>
<p>The barge stopped at no pleasure-houses, at no taverns. The master
sobbed, his head wrapped in his golden dreaming-veil. There was no
music. Only the plaintive song of the rowers made itself heard from
below. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb107" id="pb107" class="pginternal">107</a>]</span></p>
<p>Behind, in the east, the dawn paled in one long, rosy line, above
the sea ... while the festal lamps flickered out and died....
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb108" id="pb108" class="pginternal">108</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch11"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1567">Chapter XI</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Serapis had opened the floodgates of the sky.</p>
<p>The first spring rains had already descended in heavy torrents; the
water-gods had already poured the kindly streams from their urns into
the swelling Nile; the river-surveyors, who had consulted the
Nilometers<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1573" id="xd20e1573src">1</a> at every place, declared that the sacred stream
was steadily rising and that the maximum gauge would be reached that
summer.</p>
<p>The rains clattered down in white curtains of pouring waters.</p>
<p>The palm-garden of the diversorium was inundated. Master Ghizla made
his slaves dig little canals to carry the water to cisterns.</p>
<p>There was much joy and gladness at all this water. The air was
fresh; though mid-summer was approaching, an equable coolness
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb109" id="pb109" class="pginternal">109</a>]</span>tempered the atmosphere around Alexandria; no
river-mist spread seeds of disease; and the great dampness brought
relief even to this ground, which had dried up during the winter, and
to the parched air.</p>
<p>The travellers remained indoors. After the night of dreams at
Canopus, Lucius had come home in one of his impotent fits of fury,
locking himself in his room in despair and refusing to see anybody
whatever.</p>
<p>Uncle Catullus abandoned himself to long siestas; Thrasyllus studied
books, maps and globes.</p>
<p>In the porch of the slaves’ quarters sat Cora. As she was
forbidden to sing or play, she sat crouched with her arms around her
knees, gazing mournfully at the rains. Their lord’s sickness
spread melancholy among all his household.</p>
<p>Caleb squatted beside Cora. Like her he sat with his arms around his
knees and he smiled with his flashing eyes and teeth and said:</p>
<p>“Cora, I love you very much.”</p>
<p>Cora did not move; she merely answered, very gently:</p>
<p>“I am not free; I belong to the master.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb110" id="pb110" class="pginternal">110</a>]</span></p>
<p>“I should like to buy you, Cora; and then you would be
free.”</p>
<p>Cora did not answer; the rain poured down in an endless grey sheet;
and in the palm-garden, under an umbrella, Master Ghizla drilled his
dripping slaves.</p>
<p>“You would be free,” Caleb repeated. “You would
not be my slave, but my wife. I am rich: we are rich, Ghizla and I. We
do a very good business. Our diversorium is the finest in Alexandria.
We make a great deal of money, because all princely nobles alight at
our establishment. Cora, you would be its mistress. You would have
slaves, male and female. I would pay your master whatever he asked; it
would be deducted from his bill. For business is business, you know.
But I could pay for you, if necessary, in ready money. And then, Cora,
when we have grown very rich ... then we would go back to Saba, to my
native land. It is the sweetest and most beautiful country in the world
... to live in, you know. But there’s no business to be done
there. You have to be rich there; then it’s delightful. When we
are rich, we will go back there. Cora, shall I tell you about Saba,
about my country, even if it were only, Cora, to divert <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb111" id="pb111" class="pginternal">111</a>]</span>you,
now that it’s raining and you mustn’t sing?”</p>
<p>“I am listening, Caleb.”</p>
<p>“Saba, dear Cora, is the mightiest kingdom of Arabia; Saba is
Arabia Felix, Cora. Saba is the sweet land where the balsam-trees grow
and the precious spices are gathered: myrrh and frankincense and
cinnamon. All the herbs and flowers, Cora, are scented in Saba; there
is no herb and no flower that is not scented. Under the sky, which is
transparent as empty blue space, the clouds of perfume waft up and rise
to the feet of the gods, who always glance down smilingly upon my
country, upon my happy country. The palm-tree is scented there and the
calamus-reed is scented there; the scented papyrus blossoms there.
Nowhere are the flowers so big and of so many kinds, or the trees so
densely-leaved or so green. Nowhere are the nights so mild and the days
so blissful. The nights are for feasting and the days for resting. We
climb up long ladders into the tall trees and sleep in leafy nests,
like birds. Mariaba is my town, the golden capital of my sweet land.
Have you ever seen a fairy-city in your dreams, Cora? That is Mariaba.
There are temples <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb112" id="pb112" class="pginternal">112</a>]</span>of chrysolite with domes of blue crystal,
which imitate the firmament. The streets are strewn with golden sand.
Mariaba is situated on a hill, like the palace of a god. The king,
Cora, is a descendant of Balkis, our great queen, who brought Solomon
the treasures of Ophir; the king lives at Mariaba in a palace walled
with gold. The walls of his apartments are like blue mirrors and he
treads on carpets that are woven of flowers and hourly renewed. He does
not eat, but lives on perfumes. He is sacred, but he may not leave his
palace; for an oracle has commanded his people to stone him the moment
that he comes out. Everything in his palace and in the town is luxury
and delight. There is no commerce, there is no business. The
Sabæans surrender the trade in the precious products of their
country to the men of Syria and Mesopotamia. They themselves, Cora, are
rich and as gods.... When we are rich and you are my wife ... we shall
be as gods in Mariaba and you shall see the king, behind a transparent
hanging of gold glass, while he feeds on those perfumes. We shall live
in a house of alabaster, which is transparent, but only to those
inside. We shall have a barge of blue leather with red-silk tassels and
little <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb113" id="pb113" class="pginternal">113</a>]</span>golden, tinkling bells.... When the evening wind
is fresh, we shall warm our hands at glowing cinnamon. I shall anoint
your body with fluid larimnum, which is the most costly of aromatics
and is not exported, not even to Cæsar. We shall have no plate
except of gold and an ivory couch inlaid with jasper, or perhaps with
sard. And you will go about on an elephant with silvered hoofs, many
gold bands round his trunk and, at night, two little lanterns on his
tusks, Cora. And we shall be happier than you can imagine or than I can
tell.”<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1616" id="xd20e1616src">2</a></p>
<p>“What you are describing, Caleb, is indeed like fairyland. But
I have heard say that, because of all that fragrance in their country,
the Sabæans one and all suffer from headache.”</p>
<p>“When we suffer from headache, Cora, we burn asphalt and the
hairs of a goat’s beard. There is no remedy to compare with that
for headache. Or else we wear the sacred amulets. Wear one, Cora: wear
this amulet, which I have always worn.”</p>
<p>“No, Caleb.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb114" id="pb114" class="pginternal">114</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Are you afraid that I shall bewitch you?”</p>
<p>“Yes. I fear the Sabæan amulets. It is perhaps because
of one of them that the master dreamed the bad dream which has made him
ill and sad.”</p>
<p>“Cora, I love you so much.... Will you permit me to buy you
from your master?”</p>
<p>“If you bought me, O Caleb, I should be a faithful slave and
sing and play the harp to you. But I should be unhappy, even if I were
your wife and free ... because I should be so far from my
master....”</p>
<p>“Whom you love.”</p>
<p>Cora hesitated. Then she said:</p>
<p>“Whom I love, Caleb ... but as the flower loves the sun, as
the moth loves the star ... from afar and from the depths ... without
hope.”</p>
<p>The rain poured down in an endless grey sheet. In the garden, Master
Ghizla was swearing at the slaves and wading, with tucked-up tunic and
lean, hairy legs, through the puddles.</p>
<p>Caleb rose. He said nothing and went away, his head sunk in
melancholy. Then he came back and resumed:</p>
<p>“You would go hunting with me, Cora, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb115" id="pb115" class="pginternal">115</a>]</span>and
you would sit in front of me on a Sabæan stallion, which would be
swift as the wind, and we should catch lion-whelps in nets and tame
them with palm-wine and they would follow you about like big
cats.”</p>
<p>Cora only smiled and said nothing.</p>
<p>“I <i>know</i>, Cora, why you will not be my wife. It is
<i>not</i> because you love your master. For, even if your master loved
you, you would be a slave. <i>My</i> wife would be a free woman and
reign as queen in my house. But you will not be my wife because perhaps
you know the Sabæan law which prescribes that a married woman is
also the wife of all her husband’s brothers. But Ghizla, dear
Cora, would not dare to touch even the hem of your garment.”</p>
<p>“I did not know that law,” said Cora.</p>
<p>“There was a king’s daughter in our country, Cora. She
was dazzlingly beautiful and was the wife of fifteen brothers, who were
princes. All the fifteen of them glowed with love for her. When one of
the brothers wished to tarry in her chamber, he set his stick outside
the door, as a sign. Then the others passed their way.... When she
wearied of their eagerness to love her, she devised a stratagem. She
had sticks made <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb116" id="pb116" class="pginternal">116</a>]</span>for her, like the brothers’. When one
of the princes left her, she placed one of these sticks outside her
door. In this way she enjoyed peace.... But one day all the brothers
happened to be in the square of the town at the same time. One of them
went to visit her ... and found outside the door the stick of a brother
... whom he had just left in the town-square! Then he thought that his
wife, the wife of the fifteen brothers, was unfaithful to them ... with
a sixteenth, a stranger. And he sought his father and told him of his
suspicions. But it appeared that the wife was innocent. And not only
the father but the fifteen brothers and their spouse laughed at the
stratagem and were happy.... But you, Cora, would never need to put a
stick like mine outside your door. For I have only one brother, Ghizla,
and he would not dare to touch so much as the hem of your
garment.”</p>
<p>Cora laughed and Caleb laughed and his eyes and teeth flashed and
glittered.</p>
<p>“In that case, I’ll think it over, Caleb!” laughed
Cora. “In that case, I’ll think it over!”</p>
<p>“Do think it over, Cora,” laughed Caleb. “If you
are willing, I’ll buy you from your <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb117" id="pb117" class="pginternal">117</a>]</span>master. And we shall
have a pleasure-boat of cedar-wood, but with sails like a bird’s
wings, so that we can either sail about on the sea or soar high into
the clouds. And then on some nights we could visit the moon, where all
the people are transparent, like shades.... This is not a fairy-tale,
Cora; it’s as I tell you. We <i>have</i> those magic ships in our
seas, in our skies.... Think it over, Cora! Do think it
over!”</p>
<p>And, while Cora was still laughing incredulously, Caleb girdled his
tunic high and waded barefoot through the puddles of the palm-garden,
looking round and laughing as he went. For Ghizla had called to him to
see the canals which the slaves were digging to carry off the
rain-water to the cisterns. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb118" id="pb118" class="pginternal">118</a>]</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<hr class="fnsep"/>
<p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1573src" id="xd20e1573">1</a></span> Stone
wells on the banks of the Nile, in which the water rose and fell as in
the river itself; marked columns indicated the maximum, minimum and
middle gauge. Inspectors informed the people beforehand how high the
Nile would rise and when the stream would be likely to overflow its
banks.</p>
<p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e1616src" id="xd20e1616">2</a></span>
Caleb’s description of Saba owes very little to the <span class="corr" title="Source: authors" id="xd20e1618">author’s</span>
invention. Nearly all these details upon Arabia Felix will be found set
forth in Strabo’s Geography.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch12"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1689">Chapter XII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">But Libyan bearers carried a litter into the
garden.</p>
<p>The litter was close-curtained with blue canvas, against the
rain.</p>
<p>And a veiled woman peeped through a slit in the curtains and
beckoned to Caleb:</p>
<p>“Is he at home?” she asked.</p>
<p>Caleb recognized her, but he answered with an air of innocence and
asked:</p>
<p>“Who, gracious lady?”</p>
<p>“He,” repeated the woman. “The young Roman,
Publius Lucius Sabinus.”</p>
<p>“He is at home, gracious lady,” said Caleb. “But
he is unwell. He will not see any one.”</p>
<p>“If he is at home, I want to see him,” said the
woman.</p>
<p>And she alighted on the stone steps of the portico. She was closely
wrapped in her veils, but Caleb had recognized her. And she offered
Caleb a gold coin, which Caleb did not refuse, because business was
business and a well-invested stater brought him still <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb119" id="pb119" class="pginternal">119</a>]</span>a
little nearer to his native land, for which he was longing.</p>
<p>“I do not know whether I can let you in,” said Caleb,
hesitatingly.</p>
<p>The woman produced a second piece of gold. It disappeared in
Caleb’s girdle as though by witchcraft.</p>
<p>“Where is he staying?” she asked.</p>
<p>“In the princes’ building, of course,” said Caleb,
proudly. “Where his little black slave is squatting.”</p>
<p>The veiled woman went up to Tarrar, squatting on a mat outside a
door:</p>
<p>“I want to see him,” said the woman. “I want to
speak to him. Take me to him.”</p>
<p>“The master is asleep,” said Tarrar.</p>
<p>“Wake him.”</p>
<p>“The master is sick,” said Tarrar.</p>
<p>“Tell him that I can cure him.”</p>
<p>“I dare not,” said Tarrar. “He would be angry. It
would be against his orders. He is accustomed to have us obey
him.”</p>
<p>“Announce me.”</p>
<p>“No,” said Tarrar.</p>
<p>“You’re a little monkey,” said the woman.</p>
<p>And she opened the door and lifted a curtain. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb120" id="pb120" class="pginternal">120</a>]</span></p>
<p>Tarrar and Caleb, dismayed, tried to stop her:</p>
<p>“She’s inside!” said Caleb.</p>
<p>“The master will beat me!” said Tarrar, shivering.
“That impudent wench!<span class="corr" title="Source: ’" id="xd20e1752">”</span></p>
<p>But Caleb, with his finger to his mouth, told him to be silent ...
and listened at the door.</p>
<p>The veiled woman stood in Lucius’ room. Lucius lay on a couch
in mournful meditation. He opened his eyes wide with amazement.</p>
<p>“I am Tamyris,” said the woman. “Lucius, I am
Tamyris. I am famed for my beauty; and I have kept kings waiting on the
threshold of my villa on Lake Mareotis merely out of caprice. I once
kissed a negro slave while the King of Pontus was waiting; and, when my
black lover held me in his arms, I called the king in ... and then
showed him the door and drove him away.”</p>
<p>“That’s not true,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>Tamyris opened her veils and laughed:</p>
<p>“No, it’s not true,” she said. “But what
<i>is</i> true is this, that I have been burning with love for you
since the day when I saw you, beautiful as a god, on the threshold of
Amphris’ pyramid. Lucius, I want to be your slave. I want to
serve and love you. I will <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb121" id="pb121" class="pginternal">121</a>]</span>cure you and make you laugh. I
shall make you forget all your sorrow. Lucius, I have served the sacred
goddess Aphrodite since I was a child of six. She has taught me,
through oracles and dreams, the utter secret of her science, the secret
of her highest voluptuousness, which she herself did not know until she
loved Adonis. Lucius, if you will love me, I shall be your slave and
reveal the secret of Adonis to you.”</p>
<p>“Go away,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“Lucius,” said Tamyris, “I have never asked a man
to love me. But my days, since I looked into the mournful depths of
your eyes, have been like withered gardens and my nights like scorched
sands. I suffer and I am ill. I have an everlasting thirst here, in my
throat, despite draughts cooled with snow and fruit steeped in
silphium. See, my hands shake as though I were in a fever. See, Lucius,
how my hands shake. They want to fondle you, to fondle your limbs
and....”</p>
<p>“Go away,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“Lucius, I long to be your slave. I, Tamyris, the famous
hetaira, who possess treasures, as you do, and the largest beryl
discovered in Ethiopia, I long to be your slave and I long to shake
your pillows high <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb122" id="pb122" class="pginternal">122</a>]</span>and soft and to lave your feet in nard and
to dry them with my kisses, kiss after kiss until they are
dry.”</p>
<p>Lucius struck a hard blow on the gong. Caleb and Tarrar
appeared.</p>
<p>“Call the guards,” Lucius commanded. “And drag
this woman away if she does not go.”</p>
<p>“I am going,” said Tamyris. “But, when I am dead,
O Lucius, burnt out with love, I shall haunt you and my ghost will
twine around you, without your being able to prevent it, and I shall
suck your soul from your lips ... until I have you inside me ... inside
me.”</p>
<p>“Gracious lady,” said Caleb, obsequiously, “the
rain has ceased and your litter waits.”</p>
<p>“I am going,” said Tamyris. “The Prince of Numidia
expects me. He has come with twenty swimming elephants, over the sea
and straight across the lake, to love me. I am giving an orgy to-night,
just to amuse him. Lucius, if you call on me to-night, we will tie up
the Prince of Numidia and tickle the soles of his feet till he dies of
laughing. Will you come?”</p>
<p>“You lie,” said Lucius. “There is no prince come
to see you and there are no <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb123" id="pb123" class="pginternal">123</a>]</span>swimming elephants. You weary me.
Go away, or I shall have you scourged from my presence with long
whips.”</p>
<p>“I am going,” said Tamyris. “But, at a moment when
you are not thinking of it, I shall bewitch you. Then you, without
knowing it, will drink a philtre which I have prepared for you; and you
will come to me and I shall embrace you. And in my embrace <i>you shall
know what otherwise would have always remained a secret to you</i>. I
am going.”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>That night Lucius went to Tamyris.</p>
<p>But he returned, the next morning, disillusionized and disappointed.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb124" id="pb124" class="pginternal">124</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch13"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1812">Chapter XIII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">“My son,” said old Thrasyllus, sitting
beside his couch, “do you intend always to cherish your illness
and longing, like a serpent that devours you, bone and flesh? The sibyl
of Rhacotis merely guessed your own thoughts. The holy Amphris could
explain nothing more than that many, who resemble one another, mean
only one in the dream. After that, what could your credulity imagine
that a crafty hetaira would make you guess in her embrace? The name of
that one man? The name of the pirate? The place where he is hiding
Ilia?... One pirate?... Who could have stolen her?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know,” said Lucius, wearily.</p>
<p>“My poor, sick boy,” said the tutor, “no one knows
and no one will ever know. She has disappeared. If she has not been
kidnapped by pirates, she is drowned. Did you not visit the
slave-markets in Rome on purpose to find her? Have you not done the
same thing here, in Alexandria? She is not to be found. Forget her, my
son. Try to <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb125" id="pb125" class="pginternal">125</a>]</span>get better. If no other woman can cure you, let
some other power than love cure you. Amphris mentioned wisdom. There is
wisdom. Seek it here, in the land of wisdom. This city, my son, is a
sinful city, though it is fair to look upon. This city is as Tamyris
herself: it is a wanton among cities. There is no more wisdom in this
city, notwithstanding the Museum, notwithstanding the Serapeum,
notwithstanding the dreams of Canopus, which die away in orgies. In
this city I have met none save merchants, usurers and venal women. This
magnificent city is a venal city. Even the philosophers here are
avaricious and venal. Even the prophets demand a talent for their
divinations. The power of money holds sway here and no longer wisdom.
Let us go farther. There is wisdom left in Egypt. And in the wisdom
which we shall find you will be cured. Listen, my son: there is the
sacred word of the Kabbala, which Moses himself received from the
godhead on Mount Sinai. That word has never been graven on tables of
stone, but Moses whispered it to his sons and those sons to theirs. It
is the key to happiness. He who utters it has the power to avoid
suffering and to know all that can be known on earth. I have sought
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb126" id="pb126" class="pginternal">126</a>]</span>for it, in the Museum, in the Serapeum, here and
at Canopus. While you lay sorrowing on your couch, my son, I have held
converse with priests and with philosophers, with prophets. I am
persuaded that I shall not find the word in Alexandria.”</p>
<p>“But where will you find it, Thrasyllus?”</p>
<p>The tutor stared before him:</p>
<p>“Perhaps farther on,” he said. “Perhaps at
Memphis. Let us go to Memphis. If I do not find the word at Memphis, I
shall look for it farther still. Let us sail up the Nile, to Thebes, to
Ethiopia. Let us go to the pillars of Sesostris. Something tells me
that we shall find it ... and that you will be cured, my son. But let
us go.”</p>
<p>Lucius approved and the departure was decided. Thereupon Master
Ghizla and Caleb had a long talk on “business,” after which
Caleb asked for an interview with Lucius, which was granted and at
which Uncle Catullus and Thrasyllus were present.</p>
<p>“Noble lords,” Caleb began, “I should like to
speak to you in your own interest. The question, noble lords, is this:
I understand from the most learned Master Thrasyllus that there is a
plan on foot to leave Alexandria and to travel over Memphis to
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb127" id="pb127" class="pginternal">127</a>]</span>Ethiopia, as far as the pillars of Sesostris.
That will certainly be a fine journey; and all great lords take that
road. But permit me, your servant, to give you a piece of advice, in
your own interest, noble lords, in your own interest. My advice is
this: hire from me and my brother Ghizla a comfortable and spacious
Nile barge, a thalamegus, not only to ascend the Nile in, but also to
live in, so far as possible, because—spoken without slander,
noble lords, spoken without slander!—the diversoria which you
will find at Hermopolis, at Leontopolis, ay, even at Memphis and Thebes
are ... <i>bad</i>, are all <i>bad</i>, not to be compared with our
far-famed Hermes House, O my honoured benefactors! No, they are unclean
hovels, standing on the edges of marshes, without any modern
conveniences; and, though you have your own cook, you would not even
find any unpolluted wells there, not to speak of wine, and would never
have a good meal again, O my Lord Catullus! Therefore, O my patrons,
hire our Nile thalamegus, in which you can live with a small following,
with a few slaves; leave the other slaves here, with the greater part
of your splendid equipment; and allow me—if you have been
satisfied, O my Lord Lucius, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb128" id="pb128" class="pginternal">128</a>]</span>with my conduct at Alexandria and
Canopus—to be your guide, at the head of your own escort, and to
remove all difficulties from your path. I know the whole of Egypt! I
have already conducted numbers of noble lords, ay, to the sources of
the Nile, to those most mysterious sources! We will take tents with us
and hire camels, when necessary, but take my advice ... and never
alight at any other Egyptian diversoria, except our Hermes House, for
they are all <i>bad, bad, bad</i> ... indescribably bad, O my noble
lords!”</p>
<p>“Caleb,” said Lucius, “I was just about to propose
to you what you are proposing to me, that you should be our guide to
the pillars of Sesostris and hire me a barge to sail up the
Nile.”</p>
<p>“O my lords!” cried Caleb, overjoyed and obviously
relieved. “How glad I am of that! For now I am convinced that you
will be comfortable and travel pleasantly and that you, O my Lord
Catullus, will dine as you have been wont to do here ... especially as
we shall not forget to take our own wines on board, the purple Mareotis
wine, thick as ink, and the topaz-yellow liqueur of Napata.”</p>
<p>“But is the last really necessary, Caleb?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb129" id="pb129" class="pginternal">129</a>]</span>asked Uncle Catullus, mischievously.
“After all, we are going to Ethiopia!”</p>
<p>“And on the way, my lord? Before we reach Ethiopia? And above
all let me also explain that the Ethiopian liqueurs ... must first
descend the Nile, to acquire the perfume and the rich flavour which
they do <i>not</i> possess in Ethiopia itself.”</p>
<p>“If only they don’t lose that perfume, Caleb, when they
ascend the Nile again!” said Uncle Catullus, jestingly.</p>
<p>“I shall see to <i>that</i>, my lord,” said Caleb, who
saw through Uncle Catullus quite as plainly as Uncle Catullus saw
through Caleb. “I’ll see to <i>that</i>. You just leave it
to <i>me</i>.”</p>
<p>“We are leaving everything to you, Caleb. Get the barge ready
for to-morrow,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“Then we shall go up the Nile next day, my lord,” said
Caleb, happy and delighted.</p>
<p>And he retired with salaam upon salaam.</p>
<p>And Master Ghizla, in the palm-garden, pretending to be busy with
the little canal, but in reality full of eagerness to know the result
of Caleb’s advice, whispered:</p>
<p>“I say!... Brother!...”</p>
<p>“Yes?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb130" id="pb130" class="pginternal">130</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Well, Caleb, well?” asked Ghizla, anxiously and looking
a little pale.</p>
<p>“They’re hiring the thalamegus ... they’re
alighting at no other diversorium ... they’re sleeping in
<i>our</i> tents, they’ll travel with <i>our</i> camels
and....”</p>
<p>“Well, Caleb, and what else?” asked Ghizla, rubbing his
hands.</p>
<p>“They’re drinking <i>our</i> wines ... all the way to
Napata!”</p>
<p>“Where <i>you’ll</i> pretend to lay in a fresh stock of
liqueurs?”</p>
<p>“You leave that to me, Brother Ghizla, you just leave it to
me!”</p>
<p>“May the gods bless you, Brother Caleb; may Thoth, Hermes and
Serapis bless you! Quick, let us look in the cellars if we have enough
in store!”</p>
<p>There came a sudden shower, as though poured from an urn in the sky
by an invisible water-god; and the two brothers, with their garments
girdled up, rushed bare-legged through the puddles of their palm-garden
to their wine-cellars, which lay warm as stone cupolas in the sun, or
else were kept cool with double walls filled with snow. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb131" id="pb131" class="pginternal">131</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch14"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e1919">Chapter XIV</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">In the still and silent night, the Delta lay flooded
by the kindly waters of the sacred river. From the Canopic to the
Sebennytic mouth, from the Phatmetic along the Mendesian to the
Pelusiac mouth, the Delta lay flooded: one still and silent sea in the
night, a wide, silver sheet of water without a ripple, stretching
farther than the eye could reach in the soft-falling sheen of the full
moon. Between the river-mouths the canals lay in streaks of silver
light, full of water to their edges. Past the blossoming reeds, past
the blossoming lotuses and water-lilies, the great barge glided up the
stream as in a vision.</p>
<p>There was not a sound amid the silence but the dripping from the
oars.</p>
<p>The night was muffled, wide and immense. It was as though the moon,
up above, had inundated the sky, even as the flood the sacred land
below. It was as though the flood of moonshine were drenching the
sacred sky also with a calm, unrippled sea, but a sea of light. The
night was like a noiseless, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb132" id="pb132" class="pginternal">132</a>]</span>silvery day; the night was like a
shadow of the day. In that inundation of the light of heaven the stars
paled, innumerous, like a silvery powder sprinkled by the moonshine.
There lay the lake of Butos, wide and mystic and gleaming. Island
emerged after island. Palms stood in clusters, stately, motionless and
delicate. A shrine appeared and vanished as the dream-barge glided down
a bend of the canal. Country-mansions stood peacefully linked together.
There were taller dykes and patches of golden, shadowy wheat. Sheaves
of corn looked like the images of gods, reverence-compelling, ranged in
order beside one another, against the wall of a barn. A peculiar scent
was wafted by, a fresh aroma as of always moist flowers.</p>
<p>The outline of a village came into view. And hamlet joined itself to
hamlet, with shrines and mansions in between. Suddenly, farther up, in
the sea of glory, in the sea of light, huge needles rose on high from
the ground, with quivering lines, and became lost in the midst of
light.</p>
<p>Thrasyllus standing by Cora on the fore-castle pointed:</p>
<p>“The obelisks of Sais.”</p>
<p>She turned, with a start, and was silent. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb133" id="pb133" class="pginternal">133</a>]</span>The
barge that afternoon had left Naucratis along the canals which seam the
Saitic nome, or province. They were now nearing the capital, Sais, the
capital of all Lower Egypt. They already saw the Anubis Avenue. And
suddenly, at a bend, between very tall reeds blossoming with tassels
and bowing before the barge, Thrasyllus pointed:</p>
<p>“The temple of Isis-Neith.”</p>
<p>There were sphinxes: they seemed to lift their basalt heads in
prayer to the moon and the sky. Lamps and lights twinkled like stars.
The thalamegus hove to; orders rang out; the sailors moored the
vessel.</p>
<p>“The temple of Isis-Neith,” <span class="corr" title="Source: Thrasylus" id="xd20e1945">Thrasyllus</span> repeated to
Lucius, who approached with Catullus and Caleb.</p>
<p>They were all arrayed in long, white-linen robes. Cora also was
similarly clad, in a long, white, close fitting linen robe. She wore a
wreath of wheat-ears and lotus-flowers at her temples. For it was the
Night of the Glowing Lights, the Feast of the Burning Lamps.</p>
<p>“Nemu-Pha is waiting for me in the temple,” said
Thrasyllus. “I wrote to him and he has consented to receive me.
He is the high-priest of Isis; and to-night he <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb134" id="pb134" class="pginternal">134</a>]</span>receives those who come to consult him. I
thought, Lucius, of going alone. Nemu-Pha is one of the holiest
prophets in Egypt. One word from him can perhaps enable me to guess
much. But, if you accompany me, with only a single thought in your sick
brain, you would break the mystic thread which might be woven between
the high-priest’s spirit and mine. Let me go alone. I have no
other care than your happiness ... even though we are not agreed on the
form which it should take.</p>
<p>“Go, Thrasyllus,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“I don’t think that I shall go on shore,” said
Uncle Catullus. “The Night of the Glowing Lights and the Feast of
the Burning Lamps leave me cold. It is colourless and cheerless; it
will be a spectral orgy. I am too old and fat, Lucius, for spectral
orgies. Go on shore alone and amuse yourself as you may.”</p>
<p>Lucius assembled his slaves, male and female. They were all in long,
white robes, the women wreathed with ears of wheat and
lotus-flowers.</p>
<p>“You are all free to-night,” said Lucius. “You
have a night of liberty. Until sunrise <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb135" id="pb135" class="pginternal">135</a>]</span>you belong to
yourselves. Go your ways and do whatever you please.”</p>
<p>Rufus handed each a small sum of money. The slaves bowed low and
disappeared, between the palms, in the direction of the moonlit,
twinkling city.</p>
<p>Only a guard of sailors kept watch on the barge. Uncle Catullus
retired to his cabin. Tarrar also did not wish to go on shore and
remained to sleep at his master’s threshold. The Feast of Isis
made many shudder who were not accustomed from their youth to its
shivery mysticism.</p>
<p>Thrasyllus had gone. Lucius also went on shore. He saw Cora
hesitating under the palm-trees while the other women slaves had
already gone gaily to enjoy their night of liberty:</p>
<p>“Why don’t you join your companions, Cora?” asked
Lucius.</p>
<p>“My lord,” Cora replied, “if you permit me, I
would rather stay here.”</p>
<p>“You are free to-night.”</p>
<p>“What should I do with liberty, my lord?”</p>
<p>“You can do what you please, go to the temple and see the
veiled Isis ... and enjoy <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb136" id="pb136" class="pginternal">136</a>]</span>yourself as and with whom you
choose.”</p>
<p>She cast down her eyes and blushed.</p>
<p>“There is a general holiday to-night,” continued Lucius,
“for slaves male and female.”</p>
<p>She folded her hands as though in prayer:</p>
<p>“My lord,” she begged, “suffer me to remain here,
near the barge. I am afraid of liberty and of the big city.”</p>
<p>“Do as you please,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>He went on alone. Loneliness sent a shiver through him because of
this strange night which was like day. A white melancholy emanated from
his soul. He felt aimless. He would have preferred to accompany
Thrasyllus. He would not have minded going to bed. He had almost
invited Cora to accompany him to Sais, but did not think it suited to
his dignity.</p>
<p>He went alone, in his white raiment, in the bountiful moonlight. How
strange the night was, all white and trembling. He approached the town.
There was nothing but the monotonous rattling of the sistra carried by
the long-robed pilgrims who walked in procession to the temple. All the
houses along the road were lit with the lamps burning at the doors and
windows, vessels full of oil with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb137" id="pb137" class="pginternal">137</a>]</span>burning wicks. It was a
strange pale-yellow twinkling in the moonshine. It was like a funeral
ceremony. For it commemorated the night on which Isis had collected the
scattered limbs of her brother and husband Osiris, murdered and
quartered by Typhon and scattered all over Egypt.</p>
<p>The procession streamed to the temple. Along the road, the
hierodules, the priestesses, danced to a monotonous chant, hand in
hand, in a long row. They threw a laugh to the numberless strangers who
had come to Sais, for that night. The strangers laughed back and picked
out the priestesses; and they withdrew together, first to the temple,
then farther away.</p>
<p>Three hierodules laughed to Lucius. They danced round him. He did
not wish to seem uncivil; also he felt very forlorn. He just laughed
back, wearily and kindly.</p>
<p>“Shall we come with you?” asked one of the
hierodules.</p>
<p>“As you please,” said Lucius. “Are you going to
the temple?”</p>
<p>“If you wish.”</p>
<p>They walked in front of him and beside him. They wore white,
close-fitting robes, with lotus-flowers and ears of wheat in their
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb138" id="pb138" class="pginternal">138</a>]</span>hair. They were gentle and civil and obliging
and young, like three young children.</p>
<p>The white multitude streamed along the streets. The obelisks of the
dromos came into view. The temple rose gigantic and mysterious, with
numbers of square buildings and terraces stacked one above the other.
There were rows of gigantic pylons, which lost themselves in the
moonlit night. The monotonous melody of the sistra rattled on every
side; on every side the lamps twinkled. Lucius felt within him an
immeasurable melancholy, because of life and because of death, because
of people and because of himself.</p>
<p>The hierodules led the way. They were kind and courteous, glad at
meeting this amiable stranger, to whom they would be obliging, as their
duty prescribed that night.</p>
<p>They entered the pronaos and secos. In the immensity of the pillared
spaces the countless sistra rattled eerily, producing a vibration which
was no longer music: it was as though the pylons and pillars themselves
were rattling, as though the very earth were rattling.</p>
<p>Suddenly Lucius felt a cold shiver pass through him. In the holy of
holies rose the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb139" id="pb139" class="pginternal">139</a>]</span>veiled Isis. It was an immense statue, five
fathoms high and surrounded entirely with a silvery film, seamed with
hieroglyphics. Above the image, on the architrave, was written:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="first xd20e117">I AM WHO HAVE BEEN,<br/>
WHO AM<br/>
AND WHO SHALL BE;<br/>
AND NO ONE HAS LIFTED MY VEIL.</p>
</div>
<p>Around the image shone thousands of burning vessels, of glowing
lamps. There was a mist of light and a smoke of incense. And round
about the image there was the incessant dance of the hierodules and the
worship of the sacrificing priests, all the night through. And ever,
like an obsession, there was the rattle of the sistra, as though the
whole immense temple were rattling.</p>
<p>Lucius, led by the three women, offered his sacrifice at one of the
numberless altars. The priest pronounced the sacred words and Lucius
poured forth the libation and paid his gold coin.</p>
<p>He felt desperately unhappy.</p>
<p>“Sir,” asked one of the women, “do you wish us all
three to accompany you to one <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb140" id="pb140" class="pginternal">140</a>]</span>of the temple-chambers? Or
would you have two of us go away?”</p>
<p>He laughed softly at their polite manners, like those of young and
well-brought-up children. He gave a melancholy glance:</p>
<p>“I am unwell, I am very unwell,” he said. “I think
I will go home alone.”</p>
<p>“Your eyes are full of pain, sir,” said one of the
hierodules.</p>
<p>And one of the others said:</p>
<p>“Cannot we comfort you and cure you?”</p>
<p>Lucius shook his head.</p>
<p>“Then let us lead you home,” said the third.</p>
<p>They left the temple.</p>
<p>“I live on the river,” said Lucius. “I came in a
thalamegus.”</p>
<p>They walked beside him, like shades. When they reached the barge,
Lucius said:</p>
<p>“I am at home here. Let me thank you and pay you. May holy
Isis protect you!”</p>
<p>“May holy Isis cure you, sir!” said the hierodules.</p>
<p>He gave them a gold coin apiece. They disappeared in the night, like
shades. But under the palm-trees was another shade. It was Cora.</p>
<p>“I am not well,” said Lucius. “I came back.”
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb141" id="pb141" class="pginternal">141</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Do you wish to go to bed, my lord?” asked Cora.</p>
<p>“No, I should not be able to sleep,” replied Lucius.
“This night is strange and unreal. I will lie here under the
trees.”</p>
<p>“I will leave you, my lord.”</p>
<p>“No, stay,” he said. “I am ill and I feel lonely.
Stay.”</p>
<p>“Suffer me to fetch you a cloak and a pillow, my
lord.”</p>
<p>“I thank you.”</p>
<p>She disappeared into the barge and returned with the pillow and
cloak. She covered him up and pushed the pillow under his head.</p>
<p>“The night is strange,” he repeated, “and unreal.
It is like a white day. There is no dew falling. I shall remain here
till Thrasyllus comes. But do you stay. I feel ill and
lonely.”</p>
<p>“What can I do, my lord? I may not sing: only the sistrum may
sound to-night.”</p>
<p>“Dance to me; move in the moonlight. Can you dance without
accompaniment?”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lord,” said Cora.</p>
<p>He lay under the palms. Cora danced in the open moonlight, near the
tall river-reeds. She twisted and turned like a white water-nymph
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb142" id="pb142" class="pginternal">142</a>]</span>that had risen from the stream. She stood still,
in attitudes of rapture. She adored Isis, her hands uplifted to the
moon. She was very lithe and slender, very white, with white flowers
and ears of wheat around her temples.</p>
<p>He lay without moving, watching her. And he thought his only
thought: where could Ilia be? For there had not been more than one
pirate....</p>
<p>When, late in the night, Thrasyllus returned, he found Lucius asleep
under the palms with Cora keeping vigil beside him.</p>
<p>“My lord is asleep,” said Cora. And she asked,
“Tell me, Thrasyllus: what did Nemu-Pha say?”</p>
<p>The old tutor looked gloomy. And he said:</p>
<p>“The wise ages have been drowned in the night of time. Egypt
is Egypt no longer. Sais is Sais no longer. If wisdom still tarries
here and is still to be found, I shall find it not by the sea, not in
the Delta. This is the granary and the emporium of the world ... but
nothing more. Great Isis hides behind her veil the worthlessness and
venality of her priests, whose last remaining pride is to sell in great
secrecy the word, ‘Be a god unto <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb143" id="pb143" class="pginternal">143</a>]</span>yourself.’...
That word does not satisfy me. But there is Memphis, there is Thebes. I
still have hope, Cora ... that I shall find the divine word which will
cure him.”</p>
<p>The old man stepped on board the barge. The night waned; yonder, in
Sais, the twinkling of the Burning Lamps died away.</p>
<p>In the east, the light broke through, as through a bursting sluice.
Long, rosy islands seemed to drift in an ocean of molten gold. A long
flight of cranes, black against the golden sky, swept down to meet the
dawn<span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd20e2120">.</span>
Cocks crowed; and on the waters of Lake Butos the first lotus-blooms
opened their white chalices. As it were crimson flowed and lay, here
and there, over the silent, silver streaks of the canals, in pools of
purple red. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb144" id="pb144" class="pginternal">144</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch15"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2126">Chapter XV</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">The travellers had left Sais, after visiting the
temple of Athene and the tomb of Psammetichus, son of Necho, founder of
the twenty-sixth dynasty, one of the twelve kings of the Dodecarchy,
who divided Egypt among themselves after the death of Sethos in B. C.
671. Psammetichus, in obedience to the oracles, defeated and expelled
his eleven fellow-kings and reigned alone at Memphis and afterwards at
Sais. Here was his tomb; it was sacred; there was an oracle attached to
it; and Lucius had consulted that oracle.</p>
<p>After that, Lucius had consulted the manteum, or oracle, of Latona
at Butos, on an island in the lake. He had next visited Xois,
Hermopolis, Lycopolis, Mendes and all the Sebennytic nome, which
contained numberless oracles and shrines. At Mendes the god Pan was
worshipped; and there was an oracle which spoke by means of the
god’s pipes. Here the goat was held sacred and received public
worship at the hands of priestesses in Dionysiac frenzy. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb145" id="pb145" class="pginternal">145</a>]</span>The
travellers next visited Diospolis and Leontopolis, Busiris and
Cunopolis and all the Busiritic nome.</p>
<p>All these towns, with numbers of villages in between, covered the
islands of the flooded Delta, densely peopled and luxuriously
cultivated. The great farmsteads and country-mansions stood linked
along the canals, which were filled high to their banks with the
flowing waters. The ears of corn swelled with ripeness along the
shores; and the cattle gleamed and glanced, grazing in the rich
meadows. The fat fields were fragrant, in these last days of the summer
month of Epiphi, with a strange, moist scent as of nameless flowers
ever drenched in dew. The sun was warm, but not burning, as though the
moisture of so many waters tempered all the heat; the fierce rays did
not burn, as though they were ever drinking the excessive damp. And
from the marshes, which the Nile had turned into lakes, rose no mist,
but the scent of the water-flowers: lotus, nymphea and nenuphar.</p>
<p>The rains seemed to have ended. The maximum gauge in the Nilometers
appeared to have been reached; only the morning dew was often heavy,
like rain. But the days <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb146" id="pb146" class="pginternal">146</a>]</span>glided past in an immaculate glory
of sunshine tempered by moisture, while the rich, fragrant country lay
stretched under smooth skies, which changed cloudlessly from morning
rose to midday blue and evening gold, in a gradual fusing of tints.
There was hardly a breeze in the evening; the atmosphere retained an
ideal perfection of heavenly, temperate warmth; this summer warmth was
fresh and cool.</p>
<p>The thalamegus glided up the Nile. The river was as wide as a sea;
everywhere, in the noonday sun, the pools of the waters glittered in
among the farmsteads, mansions and shrines. On the horizon, the
outlines of the towns, with the needles of the obelisks, shimmered in
the damp haze. At every moment, dense palm-clusters or sycamores raised
their regular canopies along the river, forming an avenue, or else
tamarisks luxuriated and their branches threw fine shadows, like blue
stripes upon gold.</p>
<p>There lay the Athribitic nome and the Prosopitic nome, whose capital
is Aphroditopolis. Lucius went on shore with a great retinue. The town,
consecrated to Aphrodite, was peopled by none but hierodules, priests
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb147" id="pb147" class="pginternal">147</a>]</span>and priestesses of the goddess. Lucius consulted
the oracle.</p>
<p>Next morning, after the orgy, he was lying under the triple awning
of the barge which was gliding still higher up the river. Around him
were screens of plaited, transparent reeds, interwoven with flowers.
Thrasyllus sat by his side:</p>
<p>“Nemu-Pha told me,” said Thrasyllus, “that both
Plato and Pythagoras spent years and years on the steps of the temples
of Isis before they were deemed worthy of learning one word of the
Hermetic wisdom. Well, I never imagined that Nemu-Pha would unlock the
Hermetic wisdom to me. But I did hope perhaps to learn a single word
with which, continuing to meditate my own thoughts, I could have
unlocked the secret, Lucius, of your happiness. But Nemu-Pha did not
speak that word to me. And yet, my son, I had to pay him a high price
to be admitted to his sanctuary. I am sorry for wasting your
money.”</p>
<p>Lucius smiled:</p>
<p>“Nevertheless, Thrasyllus, the oracles, even though they never
satisfy the questioner wholly, say very strange and impressive things.
Shall I make you a confession? <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb148" id="pb148" class="pginternal">148</a>]</span>I certainly hope that I shall
one day know who robbed me of Ilia. And, when I know, I shall not rest
until I have tortured him and made him die a thousand
deaths.”</p>
<p>“It was the pirates, Lucius,” said Thrasyllus,
evasively, “unless Ilia was drowned.”</p>
<p>“It was one pirate, Thrasyllus,” said Lucius. “All
the oracles now never speak except of one pirate. And it is for me ...
as though I saw him before me! The dog!”</p>
<p>The barge was gliding past Latopolis, on the right; on the left,
standing farther back from the river, Heliopolis showed faintly. They
were nearing Babylon, but the travellers were to go through to
Memphis.</p>
<p>“Look!” said Thrasyllus, starting up in rapture.
“The Pyramids!”</p>
<p>Lucius turned, with real interest. There on the horizon, like an
enormous, mystic geometry, the triangles of the Pyramids, which
announced Memphis, rose against the pink morning sky. They were like
eternal lines drawn by the gods from earth to heaven.</p>
<p>“The Pyramids!” echoed Lucius, as though overcome by a
mystic impression.</p>
<p>On the other side, Heliopolis was now more clearly outlined,
standing high on a hill, with the temple of the bull Mnevis.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb149" id="pb149" class="pginternal">149</a>]</span>Babylon, a suburb of Memphis, swarmed on the
river-bank and, with the battlements of its forts; was visible through
a sycamore avenue. And suddenly, after a grove of palms, Memphis loomed
into view.</p>
<p>“Memphis!” cried Thrasyllus.</p>
<p>And Uncle Catullus, appearing from his cabin, pointed and
repeated:</p>
<p>“Memphis!”</p>
<p>The old Egyptian capital lay Cyclopean, like some extinct monster,
with heavy lines of squat, bleaching sanctuaries and, on the river, a
portico of giant pylons. Behind these age-old, massive buildings the
Pyramids showed spectrally.</p>
<p>Thrasyllus pointed his long, crystal spy-glass towards the
horizon:</p>
<p>“<i>There!</i>” he said, with a shiver. “The most
sacred monument in Egypt! The great Sphinx, the immense Neith, the
ever-silent wisdom! Next to the second pyramid: that looming figure of
a gigantic, motionless animal!”</p>
<p>The barge hove to and was moored. Caleb proposed that they should go
on shore.</p>
<p>Here, even on the quays, the riotous bustle of agriculture and
commerce had ceased to reign. Under the palms there was not the
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb150" id="pb150" class="pginternal">150</a>]</span>metropolitan press and throng of Alexandria, the
world’s market-place and emporium. Only a few fruit-sellers
squatted beside their wares and uttered their cries, now that they saw
strangers, offering sliced melons and coco-nut milk. Here and there an
Egyptian cowered, dreaming, with long, split eyes. The quays were old,
grey, wide and deserted. Even the foreigners’ barge roused but
little curiosity. A few children at play assembled when the two litters
were carried on shore.</p>
<p>Caleb found it difficult to hire two camels, for himself and
Thrasyllus, but he succeeded. The cavalcade started; Caleb’s
armed guards—for an escort was needed here, because of the
robbers in the desert—surrounded the litters. And the strangers
proceeded along the quays, under the palms, to the city. Caleb rode
ahead, for he knew the city and the way.</p>
<p>The city was gloomy, huge and empty, but Lucius, ever sensitive to
impressions, underwent the enchantment of that past. For Memphis was
the eternal past. The town had once numbered six hundred thousand
inhabitants. It now haply numbered a few thousands; the rare figures in
the wide streets were dwarfed and lost. Sometimes <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb151" id="pb151" class="pginternal">151</a>]</span>a
woman’s face peeped out from the half-opened, vermilion shutters
of some great grey, dilapidated house.</p>
<p>Ye gods, what dimensions! What lines, what spaciousness of deserted
squares, what heaven-high rows of pylons! The Serapeum yonder, at the
endless end of an avenue of six hundred sphinxes, six rows of a hundred
sphinxes, the ever-silent incarnations of wisdom, the lion-women who
were the wisdom of Neith! What colossal statues, hewn out of one block
of stone and towering to the sky, with the pschent crowns of their
diadems! And everywhere the deathly silence and under the feet of the
Libyan bearers the dust of ages, which flew up on high in one dense
cloud after another!</p>
<p>Caleb rode ahead, by the sphinxes in the avenue. They stood in rows,
the wise lionesses with fixed women’s faces, eternal guardians of
the secret. Some of them were already sinking in the sandy ground,
disappearing with their stretched fore-paws. Others shelved to one
side, borne down by the pressure of the centuries. Here the Pharaohs
themselves had passed in sacred processions! Here Moses had walked and
Hermes Trismegistus; here Joseph had wandered, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb152" id="pb152" class="pginternal">152</a>]</span>the
interpreter of dreams; here, lastly, Cambyses, with his Persian hordes,
had ridden sacrilegiously! This was Memphis, thrice-sacred Memphis,
profaned long centuries ago and now dead and sinking in the devouring
sands of the desert, which approached from the west, out yonder! The
city would be swallowed up by the sands! That past would sink back into
the lap of the earth!</p>
<p>Suddenly Lucius shuddered with the mystic awe of what has been. And
his own life and grief seemed small to him.</p>
<p>They approached the sanctuary. It rose as a huge shadow. And from
every door swarmed serving-priests of Serapis, minor priests and
door-keepers ... because they saw the strangers. They ranged themselves
in front of the entrance and stood waiting.</p>
<p>Caleb said:</p>
<p>“These are distinguished Latin lords, cousins of the divine
Cæsar Tiberius, blessed be his name. They wish to see the sacred
bull....”</p>
<p>“Apis ...” said the oldest priest.</p>
<p>“Who is Osiris, in the sacred shape of the bull ...”
added other priests.</p>
<p>And others again, oracularly:</p>
<p>“And who drew the plough through the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb153" id="pb153" class="pginternal">153</a>]</span>fields of sacred Egypt when he disguised himself
with the other gods, under the forms of animals....”</p>
<p>“From the eyes of Jupiter Ammon, who wished to reign
alone.”</p>
<p>“The same,” said Caleb, flinging himself from his
camel.</p>
<p>The priests arranged themselves in processional order while the
travellers alighted and Thrasyllus also slid from his camel. And they
sang the Hymn of Apis, as they were wont to do when visitors came. For
in the huge dead city of Memphis, inhabited by hardly a few thousands,
who were dwarfed and lost in the spaces of the ancient, mystic capital
of ancient, mystic Egypt, in truth the worship of Apis was still
maintained only because all the travellers came to see the sacred bull.
The fees which the travellers paid to the priests formed the principal
revenue of their brotherhood. The temple was falling in ruins; the
enormous pylons seemed to totter, the gigantic architraves leaned
forward; the giant statues were bruised by the rains and eaten away, as
though the centuries themselves had mutilated them; the sphinxes were
sinking into the sand. But still the worship of the bull Apis was
maintained, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb154" id="pb154" class="pginternal">154</a>]</span>because of the strangers and their fees.</p>
<p>A young priest who spoke a little Latin was allotted to the
travellers and took his place by Lucius’ side, respectfully:</p>
<p>“It is a pity,” he said, smiling cheerfully, “that
Serapis did not bring you to Memphis a month earlier. For then, my
noble lord, you would have beheld the death of Apis and his return to
life.”</p>
<p>“What is this, then?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“The incarnation of the god in the sacred bull lasts a quarter
of a century,” the young, pleasant, smiling priest explained.
“After being incarnated in the bull for five-and-twenty years,
the god disappears out of the bull and the bull is marked down for
death. The priests drown him solemnly in the Nile and embalm his sacred
body and celebrate his obsequies with special ceremonies. What a pity,
my lord, that you have come too late! After the obsequies they seek the
young Apis, they seek him throughout sacred Egypt. As a rule they find
him immediately, for the godhead immediately becomes reincarnated in a
new-born bull; and, if it omit to do so, the calamity is so great that
the country is plunged into mourning and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb155" id="pb155" class="pginternal">155</a>]</span>the disaster
foretells universal plagues. But Serapis Osiris loves his Egypt and but
seldom delays the new incarnation. This time, after Apis’
obsequies, we were able at once to celebrate his blessed
advent.”</p>
<p>“And where was Apis found?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“On the farm belonging to my father, who is a
land-owner,” replied the pleasant young priest, smiling
mischievously. “I am a land-owner’s son; and, when Apis was
born in our stables, my father dedicated me to Osiris, that I might
take care of the god. I came here with him; I have been here hardly a
month; I came with him.”</p>
<p>And he smiled, glad, young and happy; his fresh, young cheeks were
still bronzed with the sun and his arms and hands were sturdy as those
of a young peasant and shepherd.</p>
<p>The singing priests drew themselves up before a secos, a square plot
of grass surrounded by columns.</p>
<p>“My lords,” said the pleasant-looking priest,
“this is the secos of the mother of Apis and we are going to show
her to you.”</p>
<p>“So she also comes from your father’s farm?” asked
Uncle Catullus. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb156" id="pb156" class="pginternal">156</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Most certainly, my lord,” replied the priest,
roguishly.</p>
<p>“That of course goes without saying,” commented Uncle
Catullus.</p>
<p>The young priest opened the gate of the secos. At the far end was
the sacred stall, like the wide interior of a temple. The priest,
vanished in the shadow.</p>
<p>And, when he reappeared, he was leading, merely by pressing his hand
against her snow-white flank, a handsome, sleek cow.</p>
<p>He led her to the strangers. She shone, well-tended and well-fed.
She had placid eyes of bluish gold, beautiful, large, soft and womanly,
the eyes of Hera herself. Her horns were gilded and her hoofs were
painted red.</p>
<p>The pleasant-looking priest led her to the strangers and was glad
and happy because Apis’ mother was so comely:</p>
<p>“Is she not handsome?” he asked proudly.</p>
<p>The strangers smiled and agreed that she was very handsome; and the
priest, with respectful familiarity, stroked her snow-white flank and
pointed out that she had one black foot. Then he kissed her, fondly and
reverently, on her moist muzzle and led her back, with the pressure of
his hand, to the temple <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb157" id="pb157" class="pginternal">157</a>]</span>that was her stall. She went,
solemnly, as though aware of her high, sacred dignity, which existed
only because of the strangers and their fee.</p>
<p>The priest, still smiling, returned; and the other priests sang
their hymn.</p>
<p>And, by the priest’s pleasant manner, Lucius seemed to observe
that he ought to pay. He beckoned to Caleb; and there were mutual,
smiling, roguish negotiations between Caleb and the priest. For Caleb
always tried to pay the fees which he distributed on Lucius’
behalf a little less liberally than he set them down on the long
papyrus scroll of his bill; and he generally succeeded.</p>
<p>But the priest was not only roguish, but very crafty and polite; and
the transaction, conducted in mysterious and jocular whispers, lasted a
long time ... until Lucius said, impatiently, but still smiling:</p>
<p>“And may we now see Apis himself?”</p>
<p>So Caleb paid, grudgingly. But the priest remained pleasant and the
other priests sang while conducting the strangers to Apis’ own
secos.</p>
<p>This sanctuary was even bigger and more impressive than that of the
white bull-mother. There was a square in front of it, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb158" id="pb158" class="pginternal">158</a>]</span>with
obelisks; and the pleasant-looking priest entered between two sphinxes.
But the pillars, the obelisks, the sphinxes seemed to totter, to slant,
to burst with old age.</p>
<p>The priests sang the hymn; and suddenly, like a whirlwind, a young
bull came trotting out of the stable over the grass-plot. It was Apis;
and the priests lifted their hands in adoration as they sang.</p>
<p>But, if his mother was stately and aware of her dignity, Apis
himself carried his divinity with the recklessness of his hot youth. He
ran across the lawn, glad to have escaped from his stable; and the
pleasant priest, laughing, ran after him. But he could not catch him by
his gold collar; and, panting for breath, the little priest said,
proudly:</p>
<p>“Isn’t he beautiful and playful? Isn’t he most
delightful, our Apis?”</p>
<p>He was beautiful and playful and most delightful, the visitors
granted. He was a splendid bull-calf. His coat gleamed black as jet;
and he was painted in accordance with the sacred prescript without
which there is no incarnation: a white moon, like a snowy little crown,
shone like a sickle between his gilded horns; and two other little
white crowns adorned him on either side above the forelegs.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb159" id="pb159" class="pginternal">159</a>]</span>His eyes blazed as might carbuncles with a light
kindled behind them; and he stared from under his curly forehead with
an almost human glance. His neck already fell into powerful, heavy
folds; his chest was broad; and he lashed his tail like a whip. His
hoofs were vermilion. And he trotted round his grass-plot and pushed
out the sods with his horns and scratched with his red hoofs. The
pleasant-looking priest now went up to him, laughing, and took him,
respectfully and yet firmly, by the gold collar and talked to him and
laughed; and Apis shook himself; and the priest laughed; and now all
the priests began to laugh and the strangers laughed and Caleb roared
and Uncle Catullus held his sides. Even Lucius had to laugh and
Thrasyllus too; they all laughed at Apis, because he was such a
delightful, pretty, playful bull-calf, just like a merry boy, with his
human eyes which looked at you naughtily and watchfully and archly ...
until all of a sudden he tore himself loose from his little priest and
ran, ran like a whirlwind, till the clods of earth flew all around.</p>
<p>“He <i>is</i> so pretty and playful!” said the little
priest, glad and happy as a boy, when he came back panting, after
locking up the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb160" id="pb160" class="pginternal">160</a>]</span>little bull again in the sanctuary. “But
he is wild, he is very wild: as a rule, we only show him through the
windows of his secos; but, when such very distinguished strangers come
to look at him, we let him out for a trot, now and again. Yes, then he
may come for a trot, once in a way!... And he himself thinks it great
fun, to come for a trot, now and then, in the presence of
strangers.”</p>
<p>Then the pleasant-looking little priest went up to Caleb, who was
still laughing aloud because Apis was such a very delightful little
bull. And there was a long and protracted discussion, mysterious,
jocular and yet weighty. For Caleb was taken aback; but then the little
priest knew what it cost to make Apis trot about so prettily for such
very distinguished strangers. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb161" id="pb161" class="pginternal">161</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch16"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2314">Chapter XVI</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">They took the repast provided by Caleb outside the
town, in a farmstead beside a canal, under a cluster of
palm-trees<span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd20e2318">.</span> There were no dainty dishes, there were no
purple-coloured wines thick as ink; but there were omelettes and there
was cestreus, the sea-fish that swims up the Nile in certain months:
fried in cici-oil, this is a popular, homely dish, it is true, but
nevertheless toothsome for hungry travellers picnicking in the grass.
There was foaming beer and hydromel, or honey-water; and Uncle
Catullus, spoilt though he was, thought the simple meal anything but
unpalatable and considered that an idyll of this sort was good for the
stomach, once in a way.</p>
<p>Lucius told Caleb to have his luncheon with them; and Caleb, after
much deprecation and many salaams at the honour shown him, squatted
down and crossed his legs and ate with relish and kept on laughing at
the thought of dear little Apis trotting round his secos for the
strangers who paid so generously. The travellers were to rest under the
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb162" id="pb162" class="pginternal">162</a>]</span>palm-trees and allow the midday heat to pass
before going on to the pyramids. For Caleb had sent the litters back to
the barge and had now hired four good camels at the farm, including two
with comfortable saddles of bright tapestry, for his two noble
clients.</p>
<p>The farmer and his wife, glad at the visit that brought them in
money, spread awnings under which the travellers could enjoy their
siesta and laid mats on the ground; and Uncle Catullus called for a
fly-net, which he wound round his head. And, while he slept and Caleb
also closed his eyes, Lucius, with Thrasyllus by his side, gazed at the
wonderful, divinely geometrical lines in the distance, the
lightly-traced triangles against the golden noonday sky.</p>
<p>“The base is square,” said Thrasyllus, “and the
summit is square, but looks pointed.”</p>
<p>“To me they seem strange, mysterious embodiments of
vastness,” said Lucius. “What are they actually?”</p>
<p>“We don’t altogether know,” replied Thrasyllus.
“Some of the pyramids were sepulchres of kings and sacred
animals. Those are the pyramids of Cheops, or Khufu, of Chephren and of
Mencheres; and we shall see <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb163" id="pb163" class="pginternal">163</a>]</span>the kings’ chambers inside
them. They were built twenty, perhaps thirty centuries ago. Herodotus
says that the pyramid of Cheops, which is the biggest, took thirty
years to build with a hundred thousand slaves, who were changed every
three months. The name is derived from <span class="trans" title="pyr"><span class="Greek" lang="el">πῦρ</span></span>
fire, because, like a flame, the pyramid ends in a point. Many were
used as store-houses in the long years of famine; others were dykes
against the sands of the desert, which blew towards Memphis and
threatened to bury the city, in a succession of ages. Many pyramids
have already been swallowed up in the sands.”</p>
<p>“What are those ruined palaces over there?” asked
Lucius, pointing to crumbled rows of pylons and pillars, surmounted by
cracked architraves, impressive ruins which stood on a hill at the
outskirts of the town and seemed to be tumbling into the Nile.</p>
<p>“The old palaces of the Pharaohs,” said Thrasyllus.
“They were ten in number. Joseph, the Jewish interpreter of
dreams, was a powerful governor under one of them; Moses, who knew
Hermes Trismegistus and learned the occult wisdom from him, all the
wisdom that can be known, was saved, as a babe, by the daughter of a
Pharaoh, where <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb164" id="pb164" class="pginternal">164</a>]</span>his sister had exposed him in a basket made of
bulrushes at the place where the princess was wont to bathe: she was
the daughter of Amenophis III., who saw his people smitten with ten
plagues sent over Egypt by Jahve, the God of the Jews, because the
Pharaoh would not suffer them to leave the country. This Pharaoh was
drowned in the Red Sea and was the father of Sesostris.... I have
written on these scrolls everything that is more or less
interesting.”</p>
<p>And Thrasyllus, glad to see that Lucius’ attention was
attracted, handed him the scrolls. Lucius began reading:</p>
<p>“This all happened here!” he said, startled and
arrested. “This is all ... the past! The age-old past, which is
gone, which was swallowed up by the sands ... thousands of years
ago!... How small we are when we look into the past ... and when we
gaze into the centuries, the centuries that have buried themselves so
deeply!”</p>
<p>“My son,” said the old tutor, “I am so thankful
that your mind is once more capable of receiving these impressions. For
the beauty of the past is a comfort for the future; and the sick soul
is healed in that beauty when it understands that its own grief is but
a grain <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb165" id="pb165" class="pginternal">165</a>]</span>of sand in a desert which blows in the wind and
conceals all things.”</p>
<p>Lucius made no further reply, absorbed in what he was reading about
Joseph and Moses, about Jahve and Pharaoh Amenophis, who was the father
of Sesostris.... <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb166" id="pb166" class="pginternal">166</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch17"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2363">Chapter XVII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">The golden noonday sky paled; the blinding topaz of
the heavens melted away into amber honey; and the sands of the desert
stretched out wide, far and endless to the last glittering streak of
the horizon, on which the sun had set. Behind the group formed by the
travellers—four camels surrounded by drivers and guards, Arabs
and Libyans—between the darkening palm-trees the gigantic city of
Memphis sank into shadow like some vast extinct monster; and the
crumbling palaces of the kings sloped down the hill, as it were
tumbling into the Nile, and mirrored their ruins in the clear sapphire
of the stream, where the pools lay pink and gold among the tall reeds
and the lotuses closing on the face of the water. The last fallen
pillars lay, round and immense, in the luxuriant grass, amid a riot of
scarlet and crimson poppies. Mysteriously carved with hieroglyphics,
they were as felled Titans of rose-red granite; and they pressed
heavily on the ground wherein they were sinking. They were of a
melancholy majesty, those <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb167" id="pb167" class="pginternal">167</a>]</span>huge overthrown pillars which had
supported the golden roofs above the might of the Pharaohs.</p>
<p>Caleb rode his camel with a swagger, as though he were bestriding
his Sabæan mare. He dug his heel into the camel’s side; and
the startled brute took great strides, snorting and grunting; Caleb
roared with delight. The Libyans, big-limbed and powerful, went
silently; the Arab drivers yelled and shouted.</p>
<p>Forty stadia from Memphis rose a broad, hilly dyke, on which the
pyramids stood. And Caleb, who, as the guide, also knew a thing or two,
cried:</p>
<p>“My lord, two of the pyramids yonder, the largest, belong to
the seven wonders of the world! They are a stadium high; and the length
of their sides is equal to their height. They are the two tombs of the
Pharaohs; but the smaller pyramid, higher up on the hill and, as you
see, built entirely of black stone, was the costliest of
all.”</p>
<p>He trotted on his startled camel around the others and cried:</p>
<p>“Master Thrasyllus won’t deny it, learned though he
is!”</p>
<p>Thrasyllus smiled; and Caleb, glad at being allowed to speak,
continued: <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb168" id="pb168" class="pginternal">168</a>]</span></p>
<p>“That black stone comes from Southern Ethiopia and is heavier
than any other stone and incredibly hard! That is why the pyramid cost
so much. But then it was erected by all the lovers of Queen Cleopatra;
and it is she who is buried there!”</p>
<p>“Caleb,” cried Master Thrasyllus, “what you have
been telling about the black stone I accept; but Cleopatra, who died in
Alexandria, was not buried at Memphis.”</p>
<p>“Cleopatra, Cleopatra!” Caleb insisted, vigorously; but
he now rushed away on his bewildered camel, because he wanted to warn
the priest-custodian of the pyramids that there were great lords
approaching.</p>
<p>“Caleb is wrong,” said Thrasyllus, as the three camels
stepped along sedately, among the gigantic Libyans and shouting Arabs,
while Caleb tore fantastically over the sands. “The black pyramid
yonder is really not the tomb of Cleopatra. The historians speak of
Doricha, an hetaira mentioned by Sappho, the famous poetess, as the
mistress of her brother Charaxus, who was a wine-merchant at
Lésbos and travelled constantly to Naucratis. This costly black
tomb is said to have been dedicated to Doricha, who died young, by her
lovers....” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb169" id="pb169" class="pginternal">169</a>]</span></p>
<p>The cavalcade had drawn near; the camels, in obedience to the
drivers’ orders, knelt down; the travellers slipped to the
ground. And Caleb at once came to meet them, smiling, at the head of
six priest-custodians, whose business it was to keep up the interior of
the pyramids and show the shrines to foreigners.</p>
<p>“Do many foreigners come here?” Uncle Catullus asked of
the oldest priest.</p>
<p>“Not a week passes in this present month,” said the old
priest, “but foreigners come to admire the sacred pyramids. You
are Latins, but we receive visits also from Greek lords and Persians
and Indians. When the Nile has subsided to its lowest gauge, however,
when the autumnal winds blow and the sand-storms begin, then no more
foreigners come. For then death and destruction blow out of the desert,
as the hurricanes of fate which one day will cover Memphis with a sandy
shroud. See these few sphinxes, whose heads alone still project above
these downs. Once they numbered hundreds; and an avenue stretched
between their silence to the Pyramids. But the desert swallowed them
up, the hurricanes spread them with dust, the sandy shroud <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb170" id="pb170" class="pginternal">170</a>]</span>covered up the wisdom of Neith. One day the
shroud will cover up all Egypt and veil all her wisdom. What was known
will be known no longer. That will be the punishment of the gods,
inflicted upon unworthy man, who will be plunged into a night of
ignorance and the bestiality of primitive desire. The centuries will
turn about!”</p>
<p>The priests in attendance, with a simple pressure of the hand, had
caused a heavy monolithic door to turn on its hinges in the largest of
the pyramids. They lighted torches and went through the syrinx, a
winding tunnel painted with gigantic figures of gods and with
hieroglyphics. It was strange, but there was a humming and murmur of
voices, though the pyramid was uninhabited. It was as though a swarm of
ghosts were whirling around like a gale of wind. The impression was
given immediately; and, when the travellers exchanged glances, they saw
in one another’s eyes that they were all four thinking the same
thing; and Caleb muttered saving incantations and repeatedly kissed his
amulets.</p>
<p>The priests led the way, while the flames of the torches blew and
blew in the mysterious draught, as though ghosts were hovering
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb171" id="pb171" class="pginternal">171</a>]</span>around. The travellers entered an enormous
square room; huge statues were sculptured in the stone walls; and,
though the room was empty, there was a smell of spices, as if the
smells of old had lingered eternally. Two bats fluttered to the ceiling
and whirled round in a circle.</p>
<p>“This is the king’s chamber of Cheops,” said the
old priest. “Once upon a time it contained a sarcophagus of azure
granite, with the embalmed body of the great King Cheops, or Khufu; and
it was surrounded by the sarcophagi of his brothers. He wore out his
people with taxes and heavy labour, in order to found this mausoleum
for himself. Where is he now? Where is his embalmed body? Where is his
azure sarcophagus? Where are the sarcophagi of his brothers Chefren and
Schafra? Where are they? Where are they? They are scattered and
vanished as grains of sand, the mummies of the proud rulers, covered
with scented wax and tightly swathed in narrow bandages; and scattered
and vanished are their sarcophagi; and one day these pyramids
themselves will be scattered and vanished, swallowed up in the lap of
the earth! Everything vanishes, all is vanity: thy <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb172" id="pb172" class="pginternal">172</a>]</span>wisdom alone, O Neith, is needful to
man!”</p>
<p>“Thy wisdom alone, O Neith, is needful to man!” echoed
the priests.</p>
<p>“And we no longer possess it!”</p>
<p>“Alas, alas, we no longer possess it!” echoed the
priests, mechanically, indifferently, while they led the way back
through the tunnel; and their words blew away in the strange,
mysterious draught, because of the invisible ghosts that hovered.</p>
<p>But, when they were outside, the priests kept their torches alight;
and they led the travellers to the small, black pyramid. They pushed
open the stone door; and the old priest went in first. There was a long
tunnel, followed by a room with smooth, black, polished walls, in which
the torches and the shadows of the travellers and priests themselves
were reflected curiously.</p>
<p>“The pyramid of Cleopatra,” whispered Caleb to
Thrasyllus.</p>
<p>“The pyramid of Doricha,” Thrasyllus corrected him, with
a smile.</p>
<p>But the old priest shook his head gently and, in a low and fond
voice, said:</p>
<p>“The pyramid of Rhodopis. She lived at Naucratis and was
incomparably beautiful and chaste. One day, when she was bathing,
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb173" id="pb173" class="pginternal">173</a>]</span>an eagle flew through the open ceiling of the
bathroom and plucked from her maid’s hands the sandal which she
was just about to lace on her mistress’ foot.”</p>
<p>Lucius suddenly turned very pale. But the priest continued:</p>
<p>“The eagle flew to Memphis, where the king was administering
justice in one of the courts of the palace; and, flying above the king,
the eagle dropped the sandal, so that it fell into the folds of the
king’s garment. The king was much surprised; and he examined the
sandal, which was as small as a child’s and yet was the sandal of
a woman. And he bade his servants search all Egypt to find the woman
whom so small a sandal would fit. His servants then found Rhodopis at
Naucratis and carried her to the king and he married her; and, when she
died, after a few months’ happiness, the disconsolate king
dedicated to her the black pyramid ... which is the costliest of all
the pyramids.... Rhodopis’ scented mummy vanished; her
sarcophagus vanished. But the sandal, which the king ever worshipped,
was preserved by a miracle. Behold it.”</p>
<p>And the priests, with their torches, lighted in the middle of the
jet-black room a crystal <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb174" id="pb174" class="pginternal">174</a>]</span>shrine, standing on a
black-porphyry table. And in the crystal shrine lay a little sandal,
like a child’s and yet a woman’s, a little red-leather
sandal with gold ornaments, arabesques that glittered incredibly
fresh.</p>
<p>“The sandal kept for tourists,” murmured Uncle Catullus,
with a sceptical smile. “We shall pay for it presently, Caleb,
just as we did for the little Apis.”</p>
<p>“But still it is very pretty, my lord,” whispered Caleb,
with a smile.</p>
<p>But Lucius was trembling in every limb. And he said to
Thrasyllus:</p>
<p>“This is an omen. I had never heard of this legend. This
sandal, in this shrine!... I would be alone with the priest!”</p>
<p>The request of so distinguished a noble could not be gainsaid. The
others withdrew, after fixing two torches in sconces. Lucius remained
alone with the old priest, by the shrine of Rhodopis’ sandal. And
then he produced Ilia’s little sandal from his breast and
said:</p>
<p>“Wise priest and holy father, you possess wisdom, you
assuredly still know the past. I have confidence in you: you shall tell
me where the girl Ilia is, whom I have lost; you shall tell me who
stole her from me. See, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb175" id="pb175" class="pginternal">175</a>]</span>this sandal is the only trace that
she left behind her. Tell me the past and I will reward you
richly.”</p>
<p>The priest took the sandal and pressed it to his head, while his
other hand trembled above the crystal shrine:</p>
<p>“May the spirit of Rhodopis enlighten me,” said the old
priest. “I see Ilia....”</p>
<p>“Dead?”</p>
<p>“No, alive.”</p>
<p>“Alone?”</p>
<p>“No, with her kidnapper.”</p>
<p>“Do you see her kidnapper?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Describe him to me!”</p>
<p>“Give me your hand, here, above Rhodopis’
sandal.”</p>
<p>Lucius stretched out his hand to the priest, above the sandal:</p>
<p>“Describe him to me!” he repeated.</p>
<p>And in his tortured mind he saw before him the image of one of his
own sailors, of whom he had been thinking lately, who at that time used
to prowl about the villa at Baiæ: a Cypriote whom he had once
caught talking to Ilia in the oleanders; she had never been able to
explain what he was doing. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb176" id="pb176" class="pginternal">176</a>]</span></p>
<p>There was a pause. The priest’s lean hand trembled violently
in Lucius’ firm grasp. And at last the priest said, with his eyes
closed and his other hand still pressing Ilia’s sandal to his
forehead:</p>
<p>“I see him, plainly, plainly! Rhodopis’ spirit is
enlightening me! I see the kidnapper! I see Ilia’s
kidnapper!”</p>
<p>“Is he tall?”</p>
<p>“He is tall.”</p>
<p>“Broad?”</p>
<p>“He has broad shoulders ... and a coarse face; he is of a
coarse beauty which women sometimes like, which unworthy women prefer
to noble beauty, because they prefer rude passion to love....
Rhodopis’ chaste spirit is over me! I see the
kidnapper.”</p>
<p>“How is he clad? As a slave?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“As a freedman?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“As a freeman?”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“As a patrician? A knight?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“As a soldier?”</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“As a sailor?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb177" id="pb177" class="pginternal">177</a>]</span></p>
<p>“No. Yes, he is clad as a sailor, I think, my lord. But I no
longer see him,” said the priest, opening his eyes. “And I
shall never be able to tell you anything more.”</p>
<p>He gave Lucius back the sandal. The other priests returned, took up
the torches. Quivering with suppressed rage, Lucius walked out of the
black pyramid. Uncle Catullus was already sitting on his camel.</p>
<p>Lucius also mounted his. The Cypriote’s image now stood
clearly before his eyes. But he said nothing; his lips were tightly
shut, his forehead frowned; his grief seemed to be restrained and
subdued in his heart by his outraged pride.</p>
<p>And, while Caleb paid the lordly fee, as he always did, Lucius
slipped into the old priest’s hand a purse heavy with gold.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb178" id="pb178" class="pginternal">178</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch18"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2528">Chapter XVIII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">The short twilight had deepened to purple over the
desert; night came gliding along the firmament; the stars began to
peep. And Caleb, who suspected Lucius’ emotion at each fresh
divination, considered that new impressions would be the best medicine
for him. After a short deliberation with Uncle Catullus and Thrasyllus,
he said:</p>
<p>“My noble lord, before the night has quite fallen, I should
like to take you to the great Neith ... for the sake both of the statue
itself and of the Jewish prophet, a hermit, who dwells in a cave hard
by.”</p>
<p>Lucius nodded his approval. And in the falling night he sat erect on
the saddle-pad of his camel and raised his head towards the stars. Had
he guessed the truth? Had the truth gradually been revealed within him?
Or had the sibyl, Amphris, the oracle and the priests whom he had
consulted really shown him the way to that truth? He did not know, he
had so many vague memories that it all grew confused in his seeking,
solving <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb179" id="pb179" class="pginternal">179</a>]</span>brain.... But he certainly was the Cypriote, the
sailor, Carus ... who, shortly before Ilia’s disappearance, had
himself disappeared from the crew of the quadrireme ... and whom he had
once found with Ilia among the oleanders! A thing which she had never
been able to explain! Carus! A sailor! Not a slave, it was true, but
one of his meanest servants! A Cyprian sailor, to have robbed him of
the woman who reigned as queen over his house, whom he dressed like a
goddess, whom he covered with everything that was precious! And she
must have been kidnapped—it could not be otherwise—with her
own consent, her own, infatuated consent.</p>
<p>Had he guessed the truth? Had his groping brain at last divined the
truth? Or had the priests and the oracles and Amphris and the sibyl
indeed revealed the truth to him? He decided that they must have done
so. His soul was inclined to accept the supernatural. And he knew, he
<i>knew</i>, thanks to the wise knowledge of the priests and the
oracles.</p>
<p>So she had been able to leave him, <i>him</i>, for his hired sailor!
He raised his head towards the stars. His lips were tightly
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb180" id="pb180" class="pginternal">180</a>]</span>clenched, his forehead frowned. But never, he
resolved, would his lips utter to any one, not even to Thrasyllus, the
secret truth which the oracles had revealed to him. He would be silent
and his pride would suppress his grief.</p>
<p>“Look, my lord,” said Caleb, while Lucius still stared
straight before him, up, towards the stars.</p>
<p>Lucius lowered his eyes. And suddenly he gave a start. The Sphinx
loomed before him in the night. In the immense starry night, with the
sands glittering all around like a silver sea, loomed the immense
Neith, the omniscient wisdom. It was more gigantic than any sphinx that
he had ever seen.</p>
<p>It had been shaped by Nature herself out of an immense monolith.
Human hands had only reshapen it more plainly for human eyes ... into
the Sphinx. It was not the veiled Isis of Sais; it was the unveiled,
silent knowledge, which had known everything from the beginning of
time. It raised its head towards the stars ... as he had done. It was
resting: its lioness-body rested and sank into the sand; its fore-paws
projected like walls. Its superhuman breasts seemed to heave in the
night. Its fixed eyes stared <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb181" id="pb181" class="pginternal">181</a>]</span>upwards and its granite veil stood
out upon its lioness-body. It was awesomely beautiful in the starry
night.</p>
<p>The travellers had alighted. And Caleb had fetched the Jewish hermit
from the cave in which he lived, opposite the Sphinx.</p>
<p>“I believe he’s mad,” said Caleb, timidly, a
little alarmed by Lucius’ frown. “But it doesn’t
matter if he is mad. He is the Jewish hermit; and all distinguished
foreigners, such as your lordship, listen to him ... because he says
strange things.”</p>
<p>“He too!” muttered Lucius.</p>
<p>The Jewish hermit came up to them in the fallen night. He was of
giant stature and incredibly old; his beard fell in waves down to his
waist. His grey robe trailed over the sand. And he exclaimed, in a loud
voice:</p>
<p>“I am Tsafnath-Paeneach, ‘he who reveals
mysteries!’ I am of the tribe of Joseph himself, who took to wife
Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On! In me was the wisdom
of Joseph, who interpreted dreams, and the wisdom of the priests of On!
But all wisdom is dead in me, Jahve be praised, since I beheld
<i>Him</i>!” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb182" id="pb182" class="pginternal">182</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Whom?” asked Lucius, dismayed by the prophet’s
booming voice.</p>
<p>“It was a night of twinkling stars!” cried the prophet.
“It was thirty years ago! I lived in my cave, as I do now! And I
knew everything and I looked Neith in the face and in the eyes....
Along the road, yonder, through the sands ... they came! They came,
they came, they drew near.... On an ass that stumbled with fatigue sat
a woman. A greybeard, staff in hand, led the stumbling beast. Then I
saw that the woman held, pressed to her breast, in the folds of her
mantle, a Child! And the woman was like Heva and like Isis; and the
Child was like Habel and like Horus. When they came before the mighty
Neith, the ass could stumble no farther through the sands of the
desert. And the woman alighted and smiled upon the Child through her
tears. But the greybeard led the woman to the mighty Neith and helped
her to climb into its deep granite lap. There the woman rested against
Neith’s bosom and the Child rested against the woman’s
bosom. And then ... then I saw, I, Tsafnath-Paeneach, I who reveal
mysteries, that the Child that was like Habel and Horus was
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb183" id="pb183" class="pginternal">183</a>]</span>radiant in the night, in the folds of the
woman’s mantle! The Child was radiant; a wreath of rays, a halo
of light shone about the Child! The mother slept, the radiant Child
slept, the greybeard slept ... and the mighty Neith watched over their
sleep in the starry night! Then, O Jahve, I knew that I had beheld Thy
Son; and this happiness was my last wisdom. Since then I know nothing
more, O Jahve, be praised! Since then I have discovered no mysteries!
Since then the knowledge of Joseph has died away within me and that of
the priests of On! For I have seen Jahve’s Son, there, there, in
the lap of Neith ... and since then I have seen nothing but that
vision! And I shall die with the vision of the radiant Child before my
eyes!”</p>
<p>The prophet’s loud, booming voice had risen to a cry of joy;
and Caleb repeated to Lucius, in a whisper:</p>
<p>“You see, my lord, he’s mad.”</p>
<p>But Thrasyllus, on the other side, whispered:</p>
<p>“He’s not mad, Lucius.... He is a seer.... He has
seen.... He has perhaps seen the new God of Whom all the sibyls
speak....” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb184" id="pb184" class="pginternal">184</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Which new God?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“I don’t know His name,” said Thrasyllus.</p>
<p>But Uncle Catullus spoke:</p>
<p>“My dear nephew, that great monstrous fellow frightens me,
here in the dark, in the desert, in front of this awful statue. Egypt
gives me too many impressions. I feel like a sponge full of water, so
soaked am I with impressions. Egypt will be the death of me, Lucius,
you’ll see it will! Meanwhile I propose to mount my
camel.”</p>
<p>And Uncle Catullus called his guards and drivers and bade them make
his camel kneel down for him.</p>
<p>But Lucius went to the prophet and drew him aside:</p>
<p>“Do you know the past?” he asked, anxiously.</p>
<p>“The past?” echoed the Jewish seer, in an uncertain
voice; and his eyes were as though blind.</p>
<p>“Do you see and can you tell me if that which I think has
happened ... is undoubtedly true?”</p>
<p>“I no longer see either the past or the future,” said
the seer. “I see nothing but the present. And the present for me
is <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb185" id="pb185" class="pginternal">185</a>]</span>nothing but ... the radiant Child
yonder!”</p>
<p>“Who is He?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“I do not know, unless He be Jahve’s Son!” cried
the seer. “He was like Habel, he was like Horus. But I do not
know, unless He be Jahve’s Son!”</p>
<p>Thrasyllus approached:</p>
<p>“Lucius,” he said, “let us go. The night is
falling and the guards have warned us against wild animals and
robbers.”</p>
<p>“Let Caleb give the prophet a gold piece,” said
Lucius.</p>
<p>Caleb produced a stater; but the prophet’s laugh of thunder
sent him staggering back:</p>
<p>“Gold!” cried the prophet, laughing like thunder.
“What do I want with dead gold! I have seen living gold; I have
seen the Child That was radiant gold as the sun itself, radiant as the
burning bush! What do I want with dead gold!”</p>
<p>“He’s mad! He’s mad!” cried Caleb. “He
doesn’t want gold!”</p>
<p>And, terrified, Caleb slipped back the stater—but into another
purse, in which he collected his savings—and rushed to his camel,
which was already kneeling in the sand. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb186" id="pb186" class="pginternal">186</a>]</span></p>
<p>In the light of the stars that twinkled over the sea of sand the
travellers rode back to Memphis. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb187" id="pb187" class="pginternal">187</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch19"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2636">Chapter XIX</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">It was very early one morning and Lucius was walking
alone on the opposite bank of the river. In the tender dawn the vast
grey lines of Memphis became visible in rose-red silhouette.</p>
<p>Lucius was wandering alone. Solitude had become dear to him, like
rest after a severe illness, especially because he doubted his cure. He
doubted; he doubted the certainty.</p>
<p>Did he know the truth? He was doubting now, after a sleepless night,
and asking himself, did he know the truth? And, if he knew the truth,
was he really cured, cured in his sick soul, cured of his
suffering?</p>
<p>He did not know; he no longer knew anything. He wandered beside the
Nile, alone, without knowing, without knowing. A dulness filled his
brain, like a mist. Life was awaking on the farms with cheerful rural
activity. The grain burst under the mill-stones; and the women on their
knees rubbed with powerful palms the dough which the men beside them
had already kneaded with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb188" id="pb188" class="pginternal">188</a>]</span>the vigorous dance of their feet.
Lucius stopped to look on; and they laughed; and he laughed back. The
men danced and the women rubbed; and they laughed and were happy. A
jealousy of their happiness rose hotly in the young Roman.</p>
<p>“Will you give me some milk?” he asked a girl who was
milking a splendid, snow-white cow.</p>
<p>The girl handed the stranger the milk in the hollow leaf of a
cyamus-plant. Lucius did not know whether to give her any money. He
drank and handed back the reed goblet:</p>
<p>“Thank you,” he said; and she laughed and went on
milking.</p>
<p>He gave her no money and went on. How beautiful the world was and
the morning! How rosy this first light over the silvering stream! How
grey and colossal the past, yonder, of that dying, sinking city! How
beautiful and impressive were every form and tint! How lovely was the
world! Even the people down there, those labourers, those
shepherdesses, those men and women baking, had a calm rustic, idyllic
beauty in their simplicity and naturalness. How good the world was and
how happy people could <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb189" id="pb189" class="pginternal">189</a>]</span>be, if the gods did not pour grief
into their hearts!</p>
<p>Grief! Did he feel grief? Or had the mere thought that Ilia had
proved unworthy of his great love already cured him of the disease that
was grief? But was he cured and did he know?</p>
<p>He was approaching the hamlet of Troia. And he remembered reading in
Thrasyllus’ notes that Menelaus had come past here with his band
of Trojan captives and generously permitted them to settle here. They
had founded their colony. Behind Troia stood a rocky mountain-range;
and behold, there was the ancient quarry from which, years ago, the
blocks of stone were hewn to build the pyramids, block upon block,
without cement! And Lucius’ feet rattled through the curious
fossils which strewed the ground like pebbles with the shapes of long
lentils and pea-pods and which were thought to be the petrified
remnants of the meals served to the many thousand slaves who had worked
at the pyramids.</p>
<p>Suddenly he saw a woman. She was resting, sitting against the rocks
and gazing at the rosy sky. He recognized his slave, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb190" id="pb190" class="pginternal">190</a>]</span>the
one with the beautiful voice, the singer, Cora.</p>
<p>She started when she saw him and rose and bowed low, with
outstretched hands:</p>
<p>“Forgive me, my lord,” she stammered, “for
straying so far from the barge.”</p>
<p>He reassured her: he was a master who did not grudge his slaves a
liberty. And he asked her, in a kind voice:</p>
<p>“Why did you stray so far?”</p>
<p>“I strayed without intending it, my lord. My thoughts carried
me along!”</p>
<p>“What were you thinking of?”</p>
<p>“I was thinking of Cos, my dear birthplace, and whether I
should ever see it again.”</p>
<p>“It is the birthplace of Apelles the painter and of Epicharmus
the poet-philosopher and inventor of comedy. It is a place of beauty
and art, is it not, Cora?”</p>
<p>“It is like a most charming garden, my lord. It contains the
temples of Æsculapius and Aphrodite. I was born there in the
slave-school. I had a delightful childhood. There was a big garden in
which I used to play.... Forgive me, my lord....”</p>
<p>“Go on.”</p>
<p>“I was trained there and tended. I was <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb191" id="pb191" class="pginternal">191</a>]</span>bathed and carefully anointed and rubbed. This
was done by the negresses. I learned to dance when I was very young.
That is why I am lithe, my lord; and I hope that I dance well. But I
also loved music; I sang. We had masters, who taught us to sing and
play the harp, and mistresses, who taught us to dance. Dryope, who was
in charge of the slave-school, was stern, but she was not unkind. My
parents also were her slaves. My father was a runner and my mother was
a dancer too. There were wagers when my father ran in a race; and he
but seldom failed to win the prize for our mistress. She would have him
flogged when he did not win the prize, but not hard, for she did not
want to injure his precious body. Dryope was a good mistress to us, for
my mother stopped dancing after she had once sprained her foot and
Dryope nevertheless remained kind and gentle to her slave. But, when I
was able to sing and dance, my lord, Dryope sold me for a big sum to a
slave-dealer who was going to Rome with a number of slaves, male and
female. I embraced Dryope and my parents and went with the dealer. He
also was not harsh to me, because I was a valuable slave, my lord; he
was not harsh <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb192" id="pb192" class="pginternal">192</a>]</span>to his slaves; he was careful of them as of
precious merchandise. Thrasyllus bought me for you, my lord, on the
slave-market in Rome; and I was proud when he paid a big sum for me
after hearing my trial song and seeing my trial dance. And now ... now
I am happy, my lord, to belong to a master like yourself. But still my
thoughts often wander to Cos, to the slaves’ quarters, to my
parents, to my fellow-slaves there and to Dryope. Forgive me, my
lord.”</p>
<p>“And would you like to go back to Cos, Cora?”</p>
<p>“My lord, our native land remains dear to us. But I belong to
you; and where you are there I will be.”</p>
<p>“And shall you be happy there too, Cora, so far from
Cos?”</p>
<p>“I shall be happy where you are happy, my lord, and unhappy
where you are unhappy.”</p>
<p>Lucius looked at her. He did not take her words to be more than the
politeness of a courteous slave, who came from a famous slave-school
and for whom he had paid a high price, because of her delicate beauty
and her accomplishments. But still the sound of Cora’s voice was
pleasant to his <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb193" id="pb193" class="pginternal">193</a>]</span>ear; and he said, graciously and with a
gentle smile:</p>
<p>“You know how to speak the word that sounds well, even as you
sing true and play true.”</p>
<p>She made no further answer and bowed her head, feeling that he did
not count her words as more than a well-sounding speech:</p>
<p>“Have I your permission, my lord, to go back to the
barge?” she asked.</p>
<p>“Yes,” he said, “go.”</p>
<p>She made a gesture of graceful reverence and moved away. He followed
her at a distance. She walked along by the tall reeds of the river. She
was very pretty and dainty, like the soft-tinted statuettes that came
from Tanagra. Her flowered muslin peplos hung limply pleated around her
shapely body in a succession of thin folds, which blew open and shut.
Her bare arms were very slender. Her blue-black hair was fine and
caught golden gleams. Now, while she stopped to pluck a flowering reed,
she stood among the stems like a nymph.</p>
<p>And Lucius smiled because she was so very pretty, so tenderly
winsome, because she sang and played the harp so very beautifully
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb194" id="pb194" class="pginternal">194</a>]</span>and because she said such civil words and had
spoken so charmingly of her native island, Cos, where she was born in
Dryope’s slave-school. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb195" id="pb195" class="pginternal">195</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch20"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2724">Chapter XX</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Uncle Catullus lay under the awning of the thalamegus
and asked Cora to come and sit by him:</p>
<p>“Sing and play me some cheerful songs, Cora,” he said.
“Be kind to me even though I be not your master. For I feel bored
here, on this Nile boat, at Memphis. I have been bored ever since
Lucius went to the oracle of Ammon, through the barren desert. What an
idea, what a mad idea! They have been gone five days now; they will
probably arrive to-morrow.... I am bored, Cora, I am horribly bored.
Egypt will be the death of me! First I am saturated with new
impressions, like a sponge with water, and then Lucius abandons me to
unlimited boredom. He’s an egoist; he never thinks of his old
uncle.... Cora, be amiable to me and sing and play me some cheerful
songs, won’t you?”</p>
<p>This was the burden of Uncle Catullus’ complaint. As he said,
Lucius had gone through the desert to the oracle of Ammon, with Caleb,
Thrasyllus and Tarrar, with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb196" id="pb196" class="pginternal">196</a>]</span>guards and drivers, and Uncle
Catullus had remained behind on the barge, under the care of Rufus the
under-steward, with all the other slaves, male and female.</p>
<p>A track led from Memphis through the desert to the oasis where the
oracle of Ammon resided. It ran through the sands marked with granite
posts, like small obelisks, nothing more. It was a chain of sign-posts
rather than a road. The summer sun beat down implacably upon the
scorching sands, which lay blown against the rocky range of mountains
along the south of which the road was traced.</p>
<p>The caravan had now been travelling five days through the sands.
Lucius, on an elephant, lay in a spacious, square litter, with blue and
yellow curtains to keep out the light, and had expressed a wish that
Thrasyllus should sit by his side. Caleb, swathed in white muslin,
which left only his gleaming eyes and flashing teeth visible, sat upon
a powerful dromedary, on leather cushions, under a great parasol fixed
to his saddle-gear, and occasionally swaying gently to and fro.
Elephant and dromedary were surrounded with long fly-nets, from which
dangled many-coloured fringes. Tarrar, also <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb197" id="pb197" class="pginternal">197</a>]</span>swathed in linens of many colours, squatted like
a little monkey on a camel and defied the sun of his native land, the
glare of his Libyan desert. The guards and drivers rode mules; and
ponies carried the travellers’ luggage, their tents, their
provisions and their still swollen water-bags.</p>
<p>For five days now they had been marching on their monotonous journey
through the desert. At break of day the caravan started; at noon a halt
was made under the tents; in the evening the procession moved on again,
until darkness and fatigue urged the travellers to rest. It was an
endless journey. It seemed as if the goal would never be reached. It
was an unrelieved alternation of gold-glittering sands, under
implacable, blazing skies, and fading sands, under endless skies of
nocturnal blue. It was an unrelieved alternation of rosy sunrises and
orange sunsets. It was an unrelieved alternation of the peeping, the
radiant awakening and the duller waning of the stars. Sometimes the
south wind rose and blew for hours. Silently the caravan plodded
through the rising whirls of sand. Sometimes the faint track of posts
seemed to have disappeared; the obelisks <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb198" id="pb198" class="pginternal">198</a>]</span>stood aslant, sunk
into the sands. A melancholy descended over man and beast.</p>
<p>The midday meal, taken under a tent, Lucius shared with Thrasyllus,
Caleb, and Tarrar. It consisted always of broiled mutton, dates and an
unvarying ration of water, with a dash of palm-wine in it. Strange to
say, Lucius was almost cheerful and declared that Uncle Catullus had
done well not to accompany them to the oasis of Ammon, as such meals
would certainly have been a sore trial for him. And, strange again,
Caleb, usually so merry and cheerful, became despondent and sad. At
least, he exclaimed, now that Lucius began to jest:</p>
<p>“I wonder, my lord, that you can be gay in these god-forsaken
Libyan sands! They weigh upon my chest, O my lord, as though I were
already sinking under them, like the obelisks and sphinxes! O my noble
lord, O my princely lord, what a desperate idea of your
lordship’s to wish to undertake this awful journey, to wish to go
to the oracle of Ammon, which is quite ruined and deserted, whither
perhaps for two centuries past no noble lord like your lordship has
ever travelled! O my lord, O my lord, if only this horrible journey
ends well! The drivers <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb199" id="pb199" class="pginternal">199</a>]</span>and guards are not yet
complaining; there is still water in the bags for men and beasts; we
have not yet experienced any other adventure beyond the appearance of
one lion, who stood proudly on the point of a rock but fled when he saw
my burnous flapping in the distance, while our hunters tried to shoot
him with poisoned arrows. But my lord, if more lions appear, or if
robbers suddenly come in sight, or if those terrible ghosts loom up:
the sphinxes with the human heads and the giants with faces of animals,
which, people say, fill the desert; or if we meet the giant snake, who
has a forest growing on his back and who makes his nest underground and
who, when hungry, bores his terrible body right through the
earth’s flat disk and swallows towns and villages, O my lord,
then I doubt, alas, whether my flapping burnous and the bows and arrows
of our hunters and guards will save us! O my lord, O my gracious, noble
lord, shall I ever see Saba again, my dear country blessed by the
gods!”</p>
<p>Thus ran Caleb’s complaint; but Lucius said:</p>
<p>“Tarrar is seeing his country again, aren’t you,
Tarrar?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb200" id="pb200" class="pginternal">200</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Yes, my lord,” said the little slave, “but I come
from the sea-coast, not from the desert, and I was not happy in my
country and my parents gave me no food to eat and the country is not
beautiful either, as Saba is, and I would much rather be with you, in
Rome, for that is the loveliest country in the world, and in your
house, which is the loveliest house in the world.”</p>
<p>After the midday rest the journey was resumed and the sun sank
slowly: the sky was like a glowing copper dome, which dulled and
cooled; and the stars came out; and over the rocky crests that rose on
ridges along the road appeared the flying figures of wild animals.
Startling roars sounded in the night, to the great alarm of Caleb, who
said that he did not mind lions or hyenas but that he was afraid of the
giants and the colossal snake and the ghosts of the desert, which lured
travellers to the magic cities which are nothing but hallucination,
enchantment and destruction. And all the drivers and guards, sturdy
Libyans and Arabs, were like him and said that they did not fear the
tangible lions and would hunt them if need be, but that they did fear
the intangible lions of the desert, all the haunting, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb201" id="pb201" class="pginternal">201</a>]</span>shadowy visions of wrath with which Typhon lures
the caravans into Hell.</p>
<p>Then great fires were kindled, to ward off the lions and the ghosts;
and they glowed in the still glowing night; and the guards and drivers
danced fantastic dances round the fires; and Caleb, to forget his
alarm, joined in the dance.</p>
<p>But Thrasyllus told his master about Alexander the Great. When
Alexander founded Alexandria, the oracle of Ammon was the most
celebrated in Egypt; and Callisthenes and Plutarch relate how the great
Macedonian started from Parætonium, on the coast, to make his way
through the desert by way of the oasis. Violent south-winds attacked
his retinue; but he did not give in, though sand-storms nearly
swallowed him up, with his elephants and camels. Suddenly, however,
kindly showers fell, at the bidding of the gods, and the winds abated
and the sand-storms dropped. Two crows flew beside the great Alexander
and guided him to the oasis.</p>
<p>At the first ray of dawn, after a refreshing sleep, the journey was
resumed, the monotonous journey, the endless journey. It was the last
day but one; and, when the halt was <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb202" id="pb202" class="pginternal">202</a>]</span>called, it appeared
that the drivers and guards had cut open the water-bags and drunk their
fill of the water. Caleb grew furious and instantly drew his dagger and
wanted to fling himself on the Libyans and Arabs; but they also drew
their daggers and everybody shouted and screamed and yelled. Then
Lucius intervened and quieted them all and gave them money; and they
fell on their knees and sobbed and begged his pardon for drinking up
the water, but they had been so thirsty and they accused Caleb of being
too sparing with the ration. And Caleb defended himself and said that
in the desert one had to be sparing and not gulp down all the water at
once, without thinking of the morrow, of the animals and of the noble
lord, who now had not a drop of water left. But the noble lord caused a
heavy basket full of lemons to be let down from his elephant and gave
each of the guards and drivers one lemon and told them that they must
now hold out, by sucking this lemon, until they reached the oasis. And
they kissed his hands and abased themselves before him and caressed his
legs and called him Osiris and Serapis and Ammon-Râ and their
life’s benefactor. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb203" id="pb203" class="pginternal">203</a>]</span></p>
<p>Men and animals were exhausted, but they allowed themselves hardly
any rest that night and no one slept and all wanted to go on, ever on,
in the last spurring of their energies.</p>
<p>Was it, after the sleepless night, because of that exhaustion and
that last spurring, an atmospheric phenomenon, an hallucination, an
illusion, a fata morgana? In the first rosy glimmers of the dawn,
reflected from the east to the west, there rose in the west as it were
a dream, a nebulous dream-vision of unsubstantial forms, the vague
paradisial vision of barely-outlined, rose-tinted trees, slender,
shadowy trunks and palm-crowns suffused in rosy light; and then the
straight lines, no more than an azure shadow, of walls, of roofs,
terraces, domes.</p>
<p>Was it a vision, was it a dream? No, it was real; and Caleb
jubilantly pointed and shouted:</p>
<p>“Ammon-Râ! Ammon-Râ!”</p>
<p>“Ammon-Râ! Ammon-Râ!” repeated the guards
and drivers, yelling wildly and cheering like madmen, for the oasis
took colour, the trees became more clearly marked <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb204" id="pb204" class="pginternal">204</a>]</span>and
the temple, large as a town, now stretched its walls impressively.</p>
<p>The horses sniffed the air and neighed, the elephants waved their
trunks, the camels swung out their legs, the men thrust forward their
throats and inhaled the fragrance of verdure and the coolness of
running wells; and the inhabitants of the oasis, poor natives in the
service of the priests of the temple, poured out of their huts to meet
the caravan and knelt in the road, offering split coconuts, juicy
oranges and scarlet fruits, of strange shapes and juicy pulp, and
earthenware dishes full of water limpid as flowing crystal.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb205" id="pb205" class="pginternal">205</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch21"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2788">Chapter XXI</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">There was a dense wood of palm-trees through which the
travellers made their way to the temple of Ammon-Râ, whose walls
lay spread like a town.</p>
<p>“See, my lord,” said Caleb, walking ahead and pointing,
“these are male palm-trees; and those more slender ones are
female; and they marry one another, my lord, and feel love for one
another; they grow towards one another, see, my lord, like these two;
and they wave to one another and the male fructifies the female; and it
is only when they love each other that the fruits are luxuriant and
their honey and wine pleasant to the taste.”</p>
<p>“It is as Caleb says,” Tarrar assented. “The
palm-trees in my country marry one another and they are the most
excellent in the whole world.”</p>
<p>“They also marry in Saba,” said Caleb, in pique.
“We have sweeter honey and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb206" id="pb206" class="pginternal">206</a>]</span>date-wine in Saba than you
have here in Libya.”</p>
<p>A heated discussion arose between Caleb and Tarrar upon the
respective merits of the Sabæan and Libyan palm-trees. But the
travellers were now entering the first gate of the temple.</p>
<p>There was a triple row of walls round the old sanctuary, but they
were falling into ruins, the obelisks were sinking away, the sphinxes
were covered with luxuriant, flowering creepers, tall grasses shot up
between the flag-stones of the dromos and all the doors were open.
There was a deep shade from the leafy tops of the turpentine-trees,
which were fragrant with heavy perfumes in the sunshine. The fleshy
aloes drove their sword-like leaves over the walls; and their long
stalks blossomed with huge scarlet flowers which smoked as though with
incense. But it was above all the daturas whose pendant alabaster
goblets poured forth a giddiness, an intoxication of heavy scents,
around which the great Atlas moths flew slowly hovering.</p>
<p>There were no door-keepers; and the travellers walked on, through
the endless dromos. The monolithic colossi rose on <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb207" id="pb207" class="pginternal">207</a>]</span>either hand; but they also were shelving to one
side, or sinking away. Lastly, from out of the vista of the pylons,
which stood in endless row after row, a group of priests approached the
travellers. It was the high-priest of Ammon-Râ, accompanied by
eleven other priests; and they were all very old and grey. They all had
grey locks and they all wore long, grey beards. They all wore long,
fiery red robes; and, when they drew near in procession, they were like
gods in their placid dignity.</p>
<p>They did not wish to betray their surprise to the travellers. The
oracle of Ammon was no longer visited as it had been visited two
centuries ago. It was no longer held in honour; the temple was fallen
into decay; summers would pass without the advent of a single pilgrim.
But Lucius had wanted to consult the oracle of Ammon just because its
historic past gave it a poetic charm for him. And, when he saw the
high-priest approach, he stretched out his hands in reverence to the
ground and knelt and bowed his head; and Thrasyllus, Caleb and Tarrar
knelt and bowed behind him.</p>
<p>“What do you seek, my son?” asked the centenarian
high-priest. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb208" id="pb208" class="pginternal">208</a>]</span></p>
<p>“The truth,” replied Lucius.</p>
<p>“Then enter into the House of the Sun,” the high-priest
ordained.</p>
<p>And the travellers rose; and the priests gladly led the way. They
led their visitors through the pronaos and naos to the secos, to the
holy of holies. And, pointing in the golden shade of midday dusk,
between pillars like tree-trunks, to the enormous statue of
Ammon-Râ, old as time, the sun-god with the bull’s head,
the high-priest continued:</p>
<p>“The Sun reveals the truth to him who is worthy to hear it,
even as ages ago he revealed the truth to Alexander of Macedon. Before
his coming, the deity uttered himself only by moving his brows and
wrinkling his bull forehead between his divine horns. But the deity
addressed Alexander of Macedon with the sound of his lowing voice and
told him, in words plainly audible to the king and all his following,
that he was the son of the Sun, the son of Jupiter
Ammon-Râ.”</p>
<p>Lucius looked up at the statue. In the golden twilight of the
temple, where the noontide daylight filtered in and broke between the
pillars in a shimmer of dust, he saw the supreme god, who was no longer
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb209" id="pb209" class="pginternal">209</a>]</span>held in honour, wrapped in shadow, paintless
wood and colourless basalt, blind and pock-pitted where his bull head
and his human neck had been robbed of the jewelled eyes and the
precious stones with which he had once been inlaid. And Lucius felt so
deep a compassion within himself for the fading god, once all-honoured
and now forgotten in his distant, sinking temple in the Libyan desert,
that he bent his knees in pity and reverence.</p>
<p>The Jewish seer, who lived in the cave of Neith, had haply seen the
new god, the Son of Jahve, crowned with light for days and days. Here,
in the immensity of his ruined sanctuary, Lucius beheld the fading of
the god who was forgotten, but whom, centuries ago, Alexander of
Macedon had travelled through whirlwinds and sand-storms to seek.</p>
<p>When Lucius looked up, he was alone with the old high-priest:</p>
<p>“Father,” he said, kneeling, “I would know the
truth. I would know if what I believe to be the truth, revealed to me
by oracle after oracle, is the truth to Jupiter
Ammon-Râ.”</p>
<p>“My son,” said the priest, “the truth does not
shine forth until after meditation, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb210" id="pb210" class="pginternal">210</a>]</span>after contemplation
and pious prayers, after days and nights of communing with the deity. I
will be your intermediary. And you shall know what you would know, if
you have faith.”</p>
<p>“Father,” said Lucius, “I lay my forehead, heavy
with care and suffering and doubt, in your holy hands.”</p>
<p>And he bowed his head towards the priest’s open palms.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>He remained five days and nights together with the priest. In the
temple, the golden shadows of the day changed into the blue shadows of
the night and the glittering of the sun into the flickering of the
lamps. There was prayer and fasting and the touch of soul to soul.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb211" id="pb211" class="pginternal">211</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch22"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2847">Chapter XXII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">After five days and nights, Lucius knew. Pale, tired
and enlightened, he sought out his followers, Thrasyllus, Caleb and
Tarrar, who were staying in the great, cavernous rooms of the temple.
And he was calm, peaceful and dignified. He bathed and ate and slept.
And at night, in the silence of the temple-grounds, which wove itself
into one mystic atmosphere with the golden gleam of the stars, he woke
Tarrar and said:</p>
<p>“Take this sycamore box.”</p>
<p>It was a small casket of delicate workmanship, which had always
accompanied him wherever he went.</p>
<p>Tarrar, heavy with sleep, took up the little box.</p>
<p>“Follow me,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>The little slave, in astonishment, followed his master. Lucius
passed through the shadow-haunted temple-precincts, which stretched
endlessly in every direction. He went through the parks, which were
haunted with sphinxes and obelisks and thick with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb212" id="pb212" class="pginternal">212</a>]</span>the
sultry heat of datura-scent. He went through the whole oasis, under the
grove of palm-trees and past the huts of the natives.</p>
<p>Tarrar followed him. The little slave felt, inquisitively, that the
sycamore casket was not locked. He opened it for an instant; and by the
flickering starlight Tarrar saw a small woman’s sandal, which he
knew. The little slave wondered and wondered. But he continued to
follow his master, faithfully; he would have followed him to the
death.</p>
<p>They came to the desert. The master entered the desert; and Tarrar
continued to wonder. The starry night now spread its dome over their
heads; the silvery sands lay outstretched before him.</p>
<p>“Dig,” Lucius commanded, suddenly turning round.</p>
<p>Tarrar gave a start. He put down the casket in the sand and dug a
hole with his hands.</p>
<p>“Deeper,” Lucius commanded. “Dig
deeper.”</p>
<p>The little slave dug; quickly, like a little monkey, he dug the hole
deep with his two hands. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb213" id="pb213" class="pginternal">213</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Put the casket in the hole,” Lucius commanded.</p>
<p>Tarrar did so and looked at his master.</p>
<p>“Cover the casket up with sand.”</p>
<p>Tarrar did as his master commanded. Then Lucius said:</p>
<p>“Now come back.”</p>
<p>And he went back to the oasis; but Tarrar, before following him,
stamped down the sand under which the casket lay buried and overwhelmed
it, amid violent gestures of delight, with native curses, curses not to
be averted, in the Libyan tongue. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb214" id="pb214" class="pginternal">214</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch23"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2893">Chapter XXIII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">The travellers had returned to Memphis and Caleb
displayed the skin of a lion which had been shot in the desert and told
the people in the thalamegus terrible tales of desert ghosts and dread
visions. The barge was now gliding up the Nile in the night; the sky
was softly blue, like dark byssus; the water was a pale blue, like
rippling silk; and the waning moon hung above the palm-clusters and
country-mansions on the river-bank like a great, overripe fruit which
threatened to burst in the sky and whose juice was already trickling in
thick orange drops that flowed far over the Nile.</p>
<p>And, while the rowers’ monotonous chant resounded with the
regular beat of the oars, Thrasyllus, sitting beside Lucius, gave way
to melancholy and said:</p>
<p>“Egypt is Egypt no longer. Alexandria is a commercial town;
Memphis is a decaying greatness; and the priests are venal and no
longer know the Hermetic wisdom. I have sought for five days among the
dusty papyri <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb215" id="pb215" class="pginternal">215</a>]</span>of the neglected library in the temple of Ammon;
it is as though all that is worth knowing were hiding
itself.”</p>
<p>“The priests must be hiding the Hermetic wisdom on
purpose,” said Lucius.</p>
<p>“They used to do so in other days for Plato and Pythagoras,
when their souls were lofty and incorruptible. Nowadays they show what
they have and tell what they know for money. But what they have is not
more than we in Rome possess in the temple of Isis; and what they know
is not the key to happiness. And yet ... and yet I believe in a sacred
word, handed down in the wisdom of the Kabbala by word of mouth, from
father to son. But I have not yet received it from any priest, neither
at Memphis nor in the oasis. And yet I have hopes. There is Thebes; and
there are the secrets of Ethiopia ... down to the pillars of
Sesostris.”</p>
<p>Lucius smiled gently:</p>
<p>“The word,” he said, “the secret of happiness ...
Thrasyllus, is happiness not an illusion of the brain? Does happiness
not lie in resigning one’s self piously to one’s fate and
is the secret word not the proud ‘Be a god unto
yourself’?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb216" id="pb216" class="pginternal">216</a>]</span></p>
<p>The old man started. And he whispered:</p>
<p>“You also? Have you also heard that word, as <i>I</i> heard it
at Sais? I took no account of it, it did not satisfy me.”</p>
<p>“It satisfied me in the oasis, because it is a proud, strong
word and I have needed pride and strength ... since I have
<i>known</i>, Thrasyllus.”</p>
<p>“Known what, Lucius?”</p>
<p>“That Carus stole Ilia from me.”</p>
<p>The old man started violently:</p>
<p>“You know?” he exclaimed. “You know? <i>Who</i>
told you? <i>Who</i> betrayed the secret?”</p>
<p>“The voice itself within my own soul, which the oracles caused
to speak to me. My own thoughts, tossing this way and that, which the
oracles guided. From the sibyl of Rhacotis, who merely guessed my own
thoughts, down to the old high-priest of Ammon-Râ, who spoke to
me like a father ... and who said to me the word, ‘Be a god unto
yourself!’”</p>
<p>“As Nemu-Pha said to me, at Sais. I paid for it in
gold.”</p>
<p>“I paid for it in gold in the oasis. But what does that
matter, Thrasyllus? The word gave me strength and pride.”
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb217" id="pb217" class="pginternal">217</a>]</span></p>
<p>“O my son, if you could be cured of your sorrow, of your
grief!”</p>
<p>“They are no longer in me. I no longer have any grief, no
longer any sorrow. I am a god unto myself.”</p>
<p>“The gods suffer. Isis suffered because of Osiris. All the
gods suffer.”</p>
<p>“I suffer no longer. My grief has departed from me. The world
and life are beautiful. See, the colours and the light are beautiful.
The sky is softly blue, like dark byssus; the water ripples like blue
silk; and the moon is like a great, overripe fruit which bursts in the
sky and whose juice trickles over the Nile. To-morrow the day will
bring another beauty. In these successive beauties, Thrasyllus, I will
be a god unto myself.”</p>
<p>“O my son, though I did not tell you the word myself, I am so
happy that you yourself found the word!”</p>
<p>In the night there sounded the high, rising tones of a harp,
followed by Cora’s crystal-clear voice, which was accompanied by
other harps and other voices.</p>
<p>“The word of pride, the word of strength, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb218" id="pb218" class="pginternal">218</a>]</span>Thrasyllus,” said Lucius, calmly; and the
old tutor saw a tranquil smile on his young master’s face as he
added, “The word that almost makes me happy.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb219" id="pb219" class="pginternal">219</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch24"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e2966">Chapter XXIV</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">After the abundant dews of the night came the delight
of the cool-warm summer day. The clustering trees now pressed their way
forward more richly and luxuriously along the banks of the Nile. Here,
on the Libyan side, lay the town of Acanthus, with its temple of Osiris
in a spreading wood of Theban acanthus-trees, of which the natives tap
the fragrant gums. Next, on the Arabian bank, came Aphroditopolis, the
second town of the name, with the temple of the White Cow; and then the
travellers reached the Heracleotic nome, a big island in the Nile, from
which a canal cuts through the Arsinoic nome, the most fertile in the
whole country. Here and here alone the olive-tree flourished in dense,
silvery woods; but here also there twisted and twined, in close
festoons, the vine-branches, on which the grapes were beginning to
swell; here the fruit-trees bent under their heavy load and the
orchards stretched; here the sickles of the husbandmen waved through
the abundant ears of <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb220" id="pb220" class="pginternal">220</a>]</span>corn. Here the fat soil yielded wealth and
prosperity; here the innumerable sheep spread in a wave of wool over
the hills, like a shadowy white sea. Here, between margins of sands,
Lake Mœris stretched exquisite and crystal blue to the horizon,
as it were a fresh-water inland sea. In earlier ages, the ocean must
have extended to those margins and stolen the whole northern land of
Lower Egypt, that gift of the Nile, as Herodotus had called it long
ago. Here the double lotus-flowers were trained to blossom in the
waters; and here the sacred scarabs were bred and worshipped upon the
white flowers.</p>
<p>Lucius would wander alone of a morning, strolling along the banks of
the lake. It was so strangely calm here and so divinely beautiful; and
a heaven-sent consolation filled the air. These were the regions blest
by the gods; and it pleased Lucius to linger here. The thalamegus lay
moored under acanthus-trees; the flowering reeds shot up to a
man’s height around her. And every afternoon, at sunset, Lucius,
sometimes accompanied by Thrasyllus, sometimes alone, walked to the
labyrinth.</p>
<p>The road lay along the waterworks of the canal, where daily, under
the supervision <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb221" id="pb221" class="pginternal">221</a>]</span>of the engineers, the quantity of water
that flowed in and out of the lake through the canal was closely
gauged. The tilled and inhabited lands around Lake Mœris, large
as a sea, were never flooded. If the Nile increased, all that happened
was that the blue crystal mirror of the lake rose. If the waters of the
river fell, then those of the lake filled them up, by careful
management of the sluices. The water was never other than a benevolent
deity.</p>
<p>Along the waterworks ran the road to the labyrinth. In the sinking
glory of the sun, in blood-red and orange splendours, Lucius saw it
daily, the strange Titanic town of monoliths, the linked rows of
palaces and courts, projecting their columns endlessly, endlessly,
towards the sunlit horizon. Orange and blood-red gleams glowed over the
flat stone tables of the roofs, which were not higher than a single
pillared storey and which spread out their immense terrace like a paved
desert. There were twenty palaces, each surrounded by twenty-seven
monolithic columns; and all this wondrous architecture of past
centuries was without a beam of wood, was without cement or masonry,
was simply stone laid upon stone with <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb222" id="pb222" class="pginternal">222</a>]</span>faultless precision
and column hewn beside column, absolutely circular, each column a
single stone. At the end of the palaces, which were a stadium long,
rose the square pyramid, the tomb of the builder, King Amenemha.</p>
<p>The holy place was guarded by priests, who led Lucius through the
halls and crypts. The twenty palaces represented the former twenty
Egyptian nomes, or provinces; and the emissaries of each province used
to gather with their priests and priestesses in their palace or court
and offer up sacrifices and discuss great questions of policy or local
welfare. But nowadays the palaces were deserted, the crypts were
deserted, and the priests led Lucius along endless, deserted, winding
corridors which meandered from palace to palace. The torches smeared
the walls with blood-red light, smeared the smooth stone walls of the
corridors and halls and floors and ceilings, stone after stone upon
stone of wonderful dimensions all resting one upon another without
cement. And to Lucius it was one of the marvels of the world, even more
marvellous, because of its sublime human architecture, than the
pyramids had been. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb223" id="pb223" class="pginternal">223</a>]</span></p>
<p>Travelling on camels with Uncle Catullus and a great retinue, Lucius
went a hundred stadia farther, to Arsinoe-Crocodilopolis. The trees
flourished more richly, more luxuriantly, like a richly-wooded park
around the travellers, till they came to the sacred lake where the
sacred crocodile, named Such, was held in veneration.</p>
<p>“Well,” said Uncle Catullus, “here’s another
of these little pets which are kept for the edification of
foreigners!”</p>
<p>And in fact the priests who came to meet the travellers in front of
the dromos of the sacred lake, surrounded on every side with pillars,
first amiably demanded a stater a head as entrance-fee, while Caleb, of
course, had seen to a supply of rich provisions, as an offering to the
deity. The slaves carried baskets with cakes, roast meats and jars of
hydromel.</p>
<p>In the lake lay Such, the huge monster; but the priests had tamed
the terrible deity: they were luring him from the middle of the lake,
where his temple was, to the bank, because some Persian visitors
happened to have arrived before Lucius and wished to present their
offerings. On the edge of the lake the priests took Such fearlessly by
his <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb224" id="pb224" class="pginternal">224</a>]</span>terrible jaws and made him swallow the cakes and
meat and wine of the Persian grandees, who were greatly diverted and
laughed aloud.</p>
<p>“They must be great noblemen,” said Caleb, “and
are going from the pillars of Sesostris to Alexandria, even as you, my
noble lords, are going from Alexandria to the pillars of Sesostris. My
lord, if you permit me, I should much like to exchange a few words with
the guide of the Persian lords.”</p>
<p>Lucius gave his permission; and the crocodile, who had swallowed his
Persian presents, swam back to the middle of the lake. But the priests
now quickly lured him to the other side, where Lucius was waiting; and
the ever greedy crocodile approached; and the priests again took him
fearlessly by his terrible jaws and the monster now swallowed
Lucius’ gifts, the cakes, the roast meat, as though insatiable;
and the priests, laughing, emptied a jar of hydromel into his maw.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, Caleb, after a few words with the guide, had sunk in
salaams before the Persian lords.</p>
<p>“He’s offering the Persians his diversorium,” said
Uncle Catullus, jestingly. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb225" id="pb225" class="pginternal">225</a>]</span></p>
<p>And in fact Caleb, in a few minutes, came back happy and swaggering
to his own travellers and said, in a mysterious whisper:</p>
<p>“I have recommended their Persian lordships to be sure to stop
at the Hermes House at Alexandria; and I slipped a gold ptolemy into
their guide’s hand. Yes, my lords, business is business; and, if
we did no business at Alexandria, I could never hope to see my beloved
Saba again. For there you must have <i>done</i> business, if you want
to live in the country; there’s no business to be done
<i>there</i>, my lords.”</p>
<p>By way of Heracleopolis, where divine honours were paid to the
ichneumon, the spotted rat that devours the eggs of the adders and
attacks the adders themselves, after first rolling itself in the mud,
which dries round its body and forms an armour, the travellers reached
Cynopolis, where the dog is worshipped as Anubis, and Oxyrynchus, where
the fish of the name is venerated. And it now appeared that, in this
region of Heptanomis, where, on the Arabian side of the Nile, the
strange battlements of the blinding white Alabastrites Mountains blaze
against the sky, all animals received divine honours, as though the
priests had instituted <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb226" id="pb226" class="pginternal">226</a>]</span>these popular forms of worship in
great numbers everywhere, so that they might the more carefully keep to
themselves the secret Hermetic wisdom. Cats and falcons, sheep and
wolves, baboons and zebus, eagles and lions, goats and spiders: all the
animals were worshipped in one or other town or village; all the
animals had their temples and priests; and Uncle Catullus said that he
grew weary of having to admire so many sacred animals, especially as
Apis, the little bull, and Such, the crocodile, were after all the only
ones that were really interesting to see. But all these cattle, all
these birds and fishes, all these creatures, from carnivora down to
insects, were worshipped, tended, fed and shown in the temples to
strangers, each time at a piece of gold a head. No, it was really too
silly, especially when, after the first Crocodilopolis, on the left,
the second Crocodilopolis appeared on the right, on the bank of the
Nile, with another Such!</p>
<p>“Lucius,” said Uncle Catullus, “honestly,
I’m not going to feed any more sacred crocodiles, nor any sacred
goats or cats or beetles either. I’ve seen enough of all those
pests, do you hear, nephew?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb227" id="pb227" class="pginternal">227</a>]</span></p>
<p>And Lucius and Thrasyllus were inclined to agree with Uncle
Catullus; and the barge sped past the wondrous purple of the
Porphyrites Mountains, gold-ruddy crests in the orange evening sky, up
to Ptolemais, the greatest town in the Thebais.</p>
<p>Ptolemais was a prosperous city, ruled like Alexandria by a
municipal government founded on the Greek model; but after Ptolemais
the travellers were especially charmed with Abydos. Here they saw the
Memnonium, which was not so gigantic as the labyrinth, but which still
was built of great single blocks of stone, according to that same
marvellous system of lost ancient architecture. They also saw the
underground well, which is reached by vaults and galleries, a
subterranean miracle of monoliths, always fitted to one another and
upon one another, without masonry. The temple of Apollo rose in a
flowering acacia-wood, as in a sudden dream of swarming white, fragrant
blossoms.</p>
<p>Lesser <span class="corr" title="Source: Diopolis" id="xd20e3031">Diospolis</span> and Tentyra followed. The
Tentyrians worship Aphrodite and hunt the crocodile, which they destroy
wherever they can; and Uncle Catullus said that they showed good taste
in this civilized choice. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb228" id="pb228" class="pginternal">228</a>]</span>After the half-Arabian Coptos and
Apollonopolis, Thebes loomed into view, with its hundred gates, the
gates which Homer sang, the gates through which two hundred warriors,
with all their horses and chariots, could pass. And, as the travellers
drew near, in the rosy dawn behind Thebes, the Smaragdis Hills appeared
in green outline, transparent and far-away as a dream, through the
misty light of the horizon.</p>
<p>Thebes was already called Greater Diospolis and worshipped
Zeus-Jupiter.</p>
<p>“Heaven be praised!” said Uncle Catullus. “The
Upper Egyptians are become sensible. Venus and Jupiter are once more
held in honour! Every conceivable sort of crocodile, goat, dog, rat,
falcon and beetle is done with. It was high time!”</p>
<p>Like Memphis, Thebes spread itself as an immense, ancient, but dying
city. For eighty stadia along the Nile its ancient palaces and temples
stood in an endless row, forsaken, ruined, cracking, slanting and
sinking, with their pillars and walls, their mutilated colossi and
sphinxes, their obelisks already fallen to the ground. Even in the sun,
a grey melancholy spread over the great city, whose streets, indeed,
were <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb229" id="pb229" class="pginternal">229</a>]</span>crowded with numbers of pedestrians, camels and
litters, but without the feverish, metropolitan bustle which had
reigned at Alexandria. The gloom of a fatally waning glory lay like a
haze over all this architectural immensity, which Cambyses, with his
Persian hordes, had in past ages destroyed beyond repair, as with
gigantic hammer-strokes.</p>
<p>In the moonlit night the city, with its vast outlines, with its
endless row of Titanic palaces, rose beside the Nile like a Titanic
citadel, mysteriously chilling to the heart. In these abandoned temples
the lost wisdom especially had been cultivated by the omniscient
priests, the heirs of Moses and of Hermes Trismegistus. Here the utmost
wisdom of philosophy and astronomy and astrology was known. Here the
year and the day were calculated by the sun and no longer, as of yore,
by the moon; here the year was divided into twelve months of thirty
days, with five intercalary days; and here was calculated the time that
must be added to the three hundred and sixty-five days in order to
arrive at the exact length of the year. The kings who reigned here
reigned, according to the hieroglyphs on the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb230" id="pb230" class="pginternal">230</a>]</span>obelisks, over Scythia, Bactria, Ionia and
India! They had ruled the world, in the deep-sunk centuries! In the
measureless spaces of their immense palaces and temples, from which the
Nile, flowing silver in the moonlight, could be seen through the rows
of pylons gleaming as it had gleamed centuries ago, not an atom
remained of the material or immaterial life of this long, long array of
monarchs. Their names alone were still extant, written on cracking or
mutilated obelisks, but their history lingered only in a few disputed
legends. The unplumbed depth of the past made Lucius’ sensitive
mind turn giddy. Yet, as he wandered by Thrasyllus’ side through
the endless forsaken halls and rooms and courts, here dark with shadow,
there lighted by the spectral moon, he was charmed by the sombre beauty
and grandeur of that giddy depth.</p>
<p>Here, too, stood a monolithic memnonium. Next came, linked together,
the forty royal tombs hewn in the rock. And, in front of this Titanic
ruin, in which not a mummy remained, the travellers saw, in the moonlit
night, the two seated colossi, themselves carved out of monoliths; but
one, with the trunk broken off—by what power?—had
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb231" id="pb231" class="pginternal">231</a>]</span>fallen in the high grass, while the other still
stared towards the east, in the hieratic attitude, the long hands upon
the knees, the pschent crowning the vast, ecstatic head, with its huge,
staring, sightless eyes, from which the enamel had disappeared and the
jewelled pupils.</p>
<p>The travellers stood in silence before the statue in the moonlight;
and even Uncle Catullus refrained from jesting. The atmosphere at this
spot was woven of shimmering divinity. The moon was waning, the dawn
was rising rose-red. And, as though with a human voice, a single note
sounded from the statue. The note was intoned clearly and almost
plaintively; it developed into the powerful sound of a man’s high
voice, swelled into something terribly human and almost divine and
broke off short and hard. They all heard it in the uncertain light:
Lucius, Thrasyllus, Catullus, Caleb, Cora, all the slaves, male and
female, who had accompanied the travellers. Caleb turned very pale and
time after time pressed his lips to his amulets.</p>
<p>And, motionless and now silent, the blind colossus stared towards
the sun, which was <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb232" id="pb232" class="pginternal">232</a>]</span>rising out of a sea of rosy beams and
gold-dust cloud.</p>
<p>That evening, in the temple of Zeus-Jupiter-Râ, the travellers
saw the strange ceremony of the wedding of the Pallade, or Pallachide.
She was the daughter of one of the greatest families of Diospolis and
was chosen a month ago, for her birth and beauty, as the priestess of
the god. She had served the god that month by giving her beauty to
whomsoever she would. Now that the period of her service was past, she
was marrying her bridegroom, a young man, like herself a member of one
of the greatest and oldest Theban families. There was a ceremony of
mourning and dirge because the service of so fair and famed a maiden
was at an end; there was the presentation of gifts by all whom she had
embraced that month; there was glad gaiety now because of her wedding.
She was attired and anointed as a goddess and received great honour
from the close-packed multitude; and after her wedding she kissed the
priestess who succeeded her, likewise a virgin from one of the leading
families of the town, and who was shown naked before the altar and was
exquisitely beautiful as a child. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb233" id="pb233" class="pginternal">233</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Every country has its customs,” said Uncle Catullus,
with a shrug. “I don’t envy the bridegroom; but no one
seems to consider it odd; and the polite thing for us foreigners to do
will be just to act as though we thought it all quite
natural.”</p>
<p>And with Lucius, Thrasyllus and Caleb he approached the bride, who
was now sparkling with jewels beside her bridegroom; and their slaves
threw roses and lilies and lotus-flowers before her feet; and she
thanked him with a silent, winning dignity, standing amid the circle of
her kinsmen in a queenly attitude.</p>
<p>But, after Thebes, to Uncle Catullus’ despair, there
reappeared on the banks of the Nile the towns at which crocodiles,
fishes and falcons were worshipped.</p>
<p>“Lucius,” said Uncle Catullus to his nephew, seriously,
one morning, while the barge was approaching Apollonopolis Magna,
“Lucius, my dear boy, I have a confession to make to you. I think
I’ve had enough of it. I’m sick of falcons, fishes and
crocodiles which are gods, not to mention dogs, wolves, beetles, bulls
and other cattle. And, in addition to being sick of all these sacred
animals, I’m sick of all those strange <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb234" id="pb234" class="pginternal">234</a>]</span>Egyptian foodstuffs, while, moreover, I suspect
Caleb of fortifying with barley-spirit the wines with which he supplies
us out of his store; and this applies not only to the thick-as-ink
Mareotis wine, but also to the topaz-yellow liqueurs of Napata....
Lucius, my dear boy, I am old and I feel ill. My head is like a sponge
saturated not with water but with impressions of strange ceremonies and
immoral customs. Also my stomach is overloaded and my palate
over-excited. I have a craving for a few succulent oysters and a young
roast peacock. I understand that one can’t get those here, on the
Nile; but still I should like to learn what your plans really are ...
I’ve heard something about hunting-expeditions and the pillars of
Sesostris....”</p>
<p>“Yes, uncle,” said Lucius, with a smile, “Caleb
did suggest that we should leave the barge at Philæ, where we
shall soon be arriving, and go through Ethiopia with carts, camels,
elephants and tents, go hunting on elephants and ostriches and travel
over Napata and Meroe, through forest and wilderness, to Cape Dire and
the pillars of Sesostris, where we shall find the quadrireme waiting
for the homeward journey.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb235" id="pb235" class="pginternal">235</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Well, my dear boy, I think that this programme, together with
my spongy brain and overloaded stomach, would be too much for me. If I
were to accomplish it by your side, then Egypt would certainly be the
death of me, a contingency which I am dreading as it is. I think,
don’t you, that I had better go down the Nile again in the barge,
past all the sacred wolves and falcons and cats and beetles?”</p>
<p>But Caleb had approached:</p>
<p>“In that case, my noble Lord Catullus,” he said,
“I have a much better plan. In fact, I, your humble, obedient
servant, agree with you that the journey through Ethiopia would perhaps
be very tiring for you. That is why I would propose that the thalamegus
take you from Apollonopolis Magna, by the canal, to Berenice, on the
Bay of Acathantus, in the Arabian Gulf.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e3082" id="xd20e3082src">1</a> At Berenice
you will meet the quadrireme, which has gone by Pelusium and the Nechao
Canal<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e3085" id="xd20e3085src">2</a> and is ascending the Arabian Gulf to fetch us at
the pillars of Sesostris. In this way you will do the journey without
inconvenience and yet with enjoyment, for the Berenice Canal passes
along the Smaragdis Mountains and they are a dream, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb236" id="pb236" class="pginternal">236</a>]</span>my
lord; my lord, they’re a <i>dream</i>!...”</p>
<p>Thus did Caleb advise him, reflecting that, if Uncle Catullus
adopted this programme, instead of going back to Alexandria, the
princely apartments at the Hermes House would remain unoccupied and
could be let to the Persian grandees who had fed the sacred Such on
Lake Mœris and who were travelling in the opposite direction to
his own noble clients.... <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb237" id="pb237" class="pginternal">237</a>]</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<hr class="fnsep"/>
<p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e3082src" id="xd20e3082">1</a></span> The Red
Sea.</p>
<p class="footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e3085src" id="xd20e3085">2</a></span> The old
canal through the Isthmus of Suez.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch25"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3098">Chapter XXV</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">And so it happened. Uncle Catullus thought that
Caleb’s suggestion was really not bad; and so he remained on
board the thalamegus with Rufus the under-steward and a number of male
and female slaves and was to go from Apollonopolis Magna to Berenice,
there to meet the quadrireme, while Lucius, Thrasyllus and Caleb took
ship in a simple barge which brought them to Syene. Tarrar was with
them; and Cora was with them.</p>
<p>“Cora,” Lucius had asked, “do you dare undertake
the journey through the forest and the wilderness?”</p>
<p>“My lord, I am your slave,” Cora had answered, gladly;
and she had gone with them.</p>
<p>“When we come back at night from hunting, Cora, you shall sing
to us under the twinkling stars of Ethiopia....”</p>
<p>At Syene the travellers saw the last Roman soldiers: there were
always three cohorts stationed at this spot, on the Egyptian frontier.
At Elephantina was the Little <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb238" id="pb238" class="pginternal">238</a>]</span>Cataract, in the middle of
the river, falling over rocky steps, across whose smooth surface the
water first shot forward quickly, to come shooting next over a rocky
rampart, roaring and clattering in a deep dive. And the travellers saw
the watermen come up from Philæ in light boats and then shoot,
with the powerful, brawling stream, over the steps and raise themselves
over the rocky wall and slip, boat and all, with joyful cries, down the
waterfall into the depths; and it looked such a safe sport that first
Caleb, next Lucius, next even Cora, strapped into a little skiff, shot
the rapids, raising themselves over the wall and slipping down the
waterfall.</p>
<p>From Syene to Philæ the journey was done in carts. There was
an end to any luxurious comfort; the road led for hundreds of stadia
through a level plain with strange big rocks, like statues of Hermes in
a Greek city, along the road. They were round and cylindrical, like
polished black stones, three on top of one another, from large to
small. The travellers were conveyed to the island in a raft of laths
and wickerwork, on which the water lapped over their feet.</p>
<p>“Herodotus tells us,” said Thrasyllus, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb239" id="pb239" class="pginternal">239</a>]</span>“that the mysterious sources of the Nile
ought to be here, near Syene and Elephantina, and that the canal which
leads to them is an abyss and a bottomless sea! But Herodotus often
tells us fairy-tales! For observe, the abyss, the bottomless sea, is
covered all over with islands; and they are inhabited; and the sources
of the Nile are certainly not here!”</p>
<p>At Tachampso the travellers again took a boat. But the Ethiopian
forests were now to be traversed. Lucius mounted his elephant; the
others mounted camels; more camels carried tents and luggage, of which
there was now only a little; and Caleb had hired a strongly-armed
escort of powerful Libyans and swift-footed Arabs. For, though the
Ethiopians themselves were not warlike and offered no danger to the
travellers, there were the savage races, the Troglodytæ, the
Blemmyes, the Nubians, the Megabari, and, above all, the Ochthyophagi
and Macrobii, who, if they were not overawed by the sight of a strong
and numerous force, might surprise and plunder the travellers. The
civilized world ended here. This was the very end of the world. True,
on the Nile there was still Napata and the Ethiopian <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb240" id="pb240" class="pginternal">240</a>]</span>capital, Meroe; but beyond that was buried the
secret of the world’s end, the secret of the sources of the Nile,
the secret of the horizons of the earth, the secret of the endless sea
surrounding the world. Here, in these forests, began the temptation
merely to go on and on, to go on in order to learn what the end would
be, with what temptations and with what dread perils. Caleb told of
travellers who had gone on and on and who had seen Typhon’s awful
giant head appear above the edge of the world, with gaping mouth; and
he had swallowed them up. One guide had escaped and had told it to
Caleb, who said that he was worthy of belief. There also, in the
immeasurable ocean that washed the world’s edge, lay the great
serpent, which coiled itself in spirals and then covered the whole
surface of the water, as far as the eye could reach, when it came up to
bask in the scorching heat of the southern sun. Once, said Caleb, some
daring travellers, who thought that the snake was a sort of dark
desert, had walked over its scales, for miles on end, until the snake
moved and they realized the terror and slipped into the sea in which
you sink <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb241" id="pb241" class="pginternal">241</a>]</span>and sink and sink, for three centuries, before
reaching the bottom of Typhon’s Hell.</p>
<p>These were the terrible tales which Caleb knew how to tell, one
after the other, while the sun set over the forest and the stars
twinkled and the fires blazed high and the tents were pitched and a
sheep roasted on the spit. And Caleb made himself so much afraid and
the guards and drivers so very much afraid that, shivering with fear,
they asked Cora to sing. Then Cora would play on her harp and sing to
them; and at the sound of her voice the dread visions, the uncanny
phantoms, the giants and pygmies vanished and sleep came over them all,
except Thrasyllus, who remained awake, smiling and thoughtful, and
looked up at the stars and reflected that, thanks to his studies, he
knew the occult secret, that the world was not a disk, washed by the
sea, but a sphere, which glowed with internal fire and moved round the
sun, the centre of the universe....</p>
<p>It was as though a new health were making Lucius strong and
cheerful. Yes, it seemed to Thrasyllus that Lucius was no longer
thinking of Ilia and that he was cured of his <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb242" id="pb242" class="pginternal">242</a>]</span>carking grief. In the Ethiopian forests, which
now almost surrounded them with an impenetrable wall of huge trees and
dense foliage and tangled creepers, he abandoned himself
enthusiastically to the delights of the great hunts which Caleb
organized, with the aid of the mighty hunters whom he had hired for his
noble client. These hunters included five Elephantophagi, with whom
Lucius hunted the elephants which sometimes pass through the forests in
herds. The elephants were often shot by archers, three of whom served
one heavy bow: two men, leg forward, held the bow; the third drew back
the string; and the arrow, dipped in snake poison, struck the elephant,
who fell stunned. If the elephant was not killed, he was surrounded
with a network of ropes; and, when he recovered consciousness, he was
tamed and made to lure other elephants. If the elephant, however, was
not to be tamed and if, after recovering his senses, he relapsed into a
dangerous rage, then he was driven, amid much shouting and yelling,
against a tree, which had purposely been sawn through at the foot.
Elephants are accustomed to rest against trees; but, as soon as the
untamable elephant leant against <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb243" id="pb243" class="pginternal">243</a>]</span>this tree, it fell over him
and prevented him from rising, so that he broke the bone of his leg and
was killed. This often implied cruelty, but it also implied danger; and
Lucius’ newly aroused manhood found satisfaction in this robust,
virile sport.</p>
<p>But there was also the hunting of the swift-footed ostriches, with
hunters selected from the tribe of the Struthophagi; and this hunt
provided the maddest enjoyment and excited Caleb and Tarrar in
particular; and Thrasyllus and Cora also came to look on, for it was a
most diverting spectacle, in which the hunters disguised themselves as
ostriches, with little skirts of feathers and with one hand stuck into
a stuffed ostrich-neck, with the stuffed head sticking out on top.
There were first wild bird-dances; then the hunters darted forward and
scattered corn and lured the real birds, which rushed after them and
pecked at the grains, until they were caught in ravines from which they
could find no issue and were shot with arrows. And with their precious
feathers, bleached and curled, the Struthophagi made costly coverings,
soft and white and downy, which Caleb bought for a song to send to
Alexandria and Rome, where they were a <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb244" id="pb244" class="pginternal">244</a>]</span>great luxury, so that
Caleb made a pretty penny by the transaction.</p>
<p>Sometimes there was danger in the forest. There was danger when the
Struthophagi met the Sionians, a tribe of nomads with whom they were
always at war; it was dangerous when the Acridophagi appeared, the
verminous locust-eaters; but the travellers’ strong escort, the
huge Libyans and nimble Arabs, inspired respect and the wild nomads
fled at the first bow-shot. And Caleb was afraid of nobody; he feared
only the wood-nymphs, who, when they have caught you in their arms,
which are pythons, laugh and laugh into your ears, until you go mad,
and then dance round with you, until you drop dead. And, when he lay
down at night to sleep under a black ostrich-feather covering, he also
feared the scorpions, which have no fewer than four jaws and whose bite
is not fatal but produces a slow, incurable canker.</p>
<p>They also caught lions, in nets, and hippopotami, in pits, and wild
buffaloes, which they pursued with the huge hounds of the Cynamolgian
hunters. They hunted from tall trees and they hunted from the reeds in
the water. It was a rude and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb245" id="pb245" class="pginternal">245</a>]</span>stimulating life; and Caleb once
said to Lucius, seriously, that he felt the courage to go on and to go
on again ... to fight the great snake in the ocean that encompassed the
earth....</p>
<p>It did not come to that, however. But the caravan was approaching
Napata and the Ethiopian emerald-mines and topaz-rocks. The
emerald-mines were like marvellous green, magic caves, in which
thousands of slaves were working; the topaz-rocks were visited at night
time: the stones, because of their yellow sheen, are almost invisible
by day, but glitter in the dark night; then little metal tubes are
planted over each stone that is found, so as to make it easier to
recognize the stones in the daytime and to grub them out. In former
ages, the Egyptian and Ethiopian kings maintained separate guards
around these mines and rocks.</p>
<p>At Napata, where the travellers now arrived, they saw their first
entirely native, barbarian town. There was not a word of Latin spoken
here; Lucius and Thrasyllus could not have made themselves understood
without Tarrar and Caleb; and even then the little Libyan slave and the
Sabæan guide <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb246" id="pb246" class="pginternal">246</a>]</span>found it difficult to grapple with the
language. The Ethiopians, who wore no clothing save the skin of some
animal round their waist, surprised the travellers by the smallness of
their stature. Everything about them was small: their houses built of
palm-leaves and bamboo, their oxen and goats and sheep; and Thrasyllus
was of opinion that the legend of the Pygmæi, or nations of
dwarfs, had originated because of Ethiopia.</p>
<p>The natives ate hardly any meat, but mainly vegetables and fruits,
or young shoots of trees, or they would suck reed-stalks and
lotus-flowers. But they also took blood and milk and cheese; and there
was no other food. No, Uncle Catullus would never have stood it here,
thought Lucius, when the travellers went still farther south, to the
capital of Ethiopia, Meroe, on the island of the same name. And here
Lucius discovered that the famous date-wines and topaz-yellow liqueurs
of Napata and Meroe were a sheer hoax, that there was no wine or
liqueur whatever distilled in Ethiopia and that the delicious drinks
with which Master Ghizla and Caleb had provided him and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb247" id="pb247" class="pginternal">247</a>]</span>Uncle Catullus came from no farther than Lake
Mareotis at Alexandria!</p>
<p>A fabulous vegetation, however, grew luxuriantly over the island. If
the people and animals were small, the trees shot up with amazing
vigour: the huge palm-trees, the ebony-trees, the ceratia and persea,
under whose gigantic domes of thick foliage the green villages of
little plaited wicker huts disappeared from view. In the marshes round
Lake Psebo the travellers hunted, if not the great snake, at any rate
the terrible boa, which even ventures to attack the elephant. And the
natives showed them a fight between one of these boas and an elephant
and a hippopotamus.</p>
<p>They visited the gold-mines, the copper-mines, the jewel-mines, the
temples of Hercules and Pan and of a strange barbaric deity. The dead
were buried in the Nile, or else they were kept in the houses under a
mica slab of human form. In the middle of the town stood the Golden
Temple, where the king dwelt in sacred mystery. There were slabs of
gold between bamboo columns. In former ages the priests elected the
kings and deposed them at will; but a certain king had caused all the
priests to be strangled <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb248" id="pb248" class="pginternal">248</a>]</span>and since then a law had been
passed that, if the king were maimed or lost a limb, all the people of
his court had to inflict the same injury on themselves, for which
reason the king’s person was guarded with great care and was
divine and sacred; and the travellers did not see him. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb249" id="pb249" class="pginternal">249</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch26"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3162">Chapter XXVI</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">After the fierce hunting by day, the nights were
twinkling mysteries of great shining, diamond stars; and Sirius shone
like a white sun. The rustling silence, the audible stillness of the
vast forests lapped the encampment of the caravan, where the fires died
out but still glowed sufficiently to keep the wild animals at a
distance and where the guards and drivers lay immersed in sound sleep.
Lucius was happy in that mystery; and in the silvery sheen of the night
the last memories of his grief seemed to lift like wisps of
disappearing mist.</p>
<p>The travellers had approached the Land of Ophir; and the pillars of
Sesostris would be reached next day. In this last twinkling night of
forest-life, with the stars shining through the foliage like a diamond
cupola above an emerald dome, Lucius had left his tent while all the
others slept. Next to his tent were those of Thrasyllus, Caleb and
Cora. And he saw Cora sitting outside her tent, which was the biggest,
because she was <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb250" id="pb250" class="pginternal">250</a>]</span>a woman, and made of spotted lynx-hides,
whose warmth resisted the plentiful dew. And she rose and stretched her
hands to the ground, in salutation, and preserved that attitude,
shyly.</p>
<p>“Are you not sleeping, Cora?” asked Lucius.</p>
<p>“No, my lord. I cannot sleep when the nights twinkle like
this, when the stars send forth such rays that it is really as though
they were moving to and fro. I feel that I must go on gazing at them
until they fade away.”</p>
<p>“Life here in the forest is too wild for you, too
lonely....”</p>
<p>“Life in the forest is paradise, my lord. By day Thrasyllus
tells me wonderful things about the mountains and the plants and the
animals and the savage tribes; and so the hours pass till you return
from hunting....”</p>
<p>“And you sing to us and dance in the light of the fire and
charm the rude hunters and Caleb in particular....”</p>
<p>She smiled and made no reply.</p>
<p>Then she continued:</p>
<p>“And the nights are such strange mysteries of sounds and
silence and of radiant <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb251" id="pb251" class="pginternal">251</a>]</span>stars; and it is as though Sirius
grew bigger nightly.”</p>
<p>“And you are never frightened?”</p>
<p>“I am not frightened, my lord.”</p>
<p>“Not even at night?”</p>
<p>“Least of all at night, because ...”</p>
<p>“Because what?”</p>
<p>“Because then you have returned; and I feel safest where you
are.”</p>
<p>“From that height yonder, Cora, one can see the sea. I love
the sea and I often miss the sea in the forest. I am glad that we are
near the sea again. As I returned from hunting, I could just catch
sight of a streak of sea from there. I should like to see the sea now,
at night, with all those twinkling stars above it.”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lord.”</p>
<p>“Come with me ... that is, if you are not
frightened.”</p>
<p>“I am not frightened, my lord, where you are.”</p>
<p>And her heart throbbed in her throat, but not with fear.</p>
<p>They went past the sleeping guards and left the circle of the
watch-fires. She nearly stumbled over the creepers and stones; and he
said: <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb252" id="pb252" class="pginternal">252</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Give me your hand.”</p>
<p>It was the first time that his hand had met hers. He had never
touched her before. When she felt the warm strength of his hand around
her own small hand, hers lay passive like a captive dove.</p>
<p>“Why are you trembling so?” he asked.</p>
<p>“I don’t know, my lord,” she stammered.</p>
<p>He smiled and did not speak again.</p>
<p>They climbed the rocky height and he helped her, with his fingers
still grasping hers. He even put his arm round her slim waist, to
support her, and he felt that she was still trembling, as in a
fever.</p>
<p>“Look,” he said, pointing, “there is the
sea.”</p>
<p>They both looked out. Around them stretched the forests, all shadow
and denseness and gloom and loneliness and mystery. On one horizon,
gleaming darkly in the night, lay the line of the sea, the Arabian
Gulf, the Erythræan or Red Sea.</p>
<p>“The sea,” she stammered. “Yes, the sea, I love it
too. I always had it around me, at Cos. I also miss it in the forest,
as you do, my lord.”</p>
<p>“To-morrow we shall reach the sea again, Cora.... Cora, I want
you, to-night, this <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb253" id="pb253" class="pginternal">253</a>]</span>last night ... to dance to me ... here, in
the starlight.”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lord,” said the slave.</p>
<p>She danced. She softly hummed a tune between scarce-parted lips. The
thin folds of her garment flew to either side; and with her veils she
mimicked the movements of birds’ wings. She hovered round and
round on the upland, circling like a swallow.</p>
<p>He stepped towards her; and she ceased dancing.</p>
<p>“Cora,” he said, “to-morrow we shall be at Dire,
by the pillars of Sesostris. On the opposite side are Ebal and Usal and
Saba, Caleb’s country, to which he wants to return when he is
rich.”</p>
<p>“Yes, my lord.”</p>
<p>“Cora, if you are really fond of Caleb, I will resign you to
him.”</p>
<p>She trembled and clasped her hands. She fell on her knees and gave
one loud sob.</p>
<p>“What’s the matter, Cora?”</p>
<p>“My lord, let me stay with you! Let me dance and sing for you,
let me serve you, let me wash your feet; kick me, beat me, torture me!
But do not send me away! Do not send me away! Keep me! Keep me with
you!... I come from Dryope’s <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb254" id="pb254" class="pginternal">254</a>]</span>slave-school, I have cost you
a fortune, my lord! I am not beautiful, but my voice is good and, my
lord, I am a clever dancer. But, if your lordship is tired of my voice
and my dancing, I will wash your feet; and, when you are angry and want
to beat a slave, you shall beat <i>me</i> and ill-treat me! But keep
me, keep me, wherever you may be!”</p>
<p>She had thrown herself before him and was sobbing and kissing his
feet.</p>
<p>And he said:</p>
<p>“Then, Cora, don’t you love Caleb?”</p>
<p>“My lord,” she said, “I love you—if I must
say it!—and I have loved you from the first moment when
Thrasyllus brought me to you. And, if it please you, my lord, I will
die for you. But keep me and do not give me to Caleb!”</p>
<p>“And if it pleased me, Cora ... that you should not die for me
but live for me? Not only to sing to me and dance to me, but also to
throw your arms around my neck, to lay your breast upon my breast and
your lips upon my lips?...”</p>
<p>She gave a cry as of incredible happiness. Smiling, he raised her
very tenderly and folded her in his arms, close against him.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb255" id="pb255" class="pginternal">255</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Oh!” she cried, in ecstasy, when his lips sought hers.
“Aphrodite! Aphrodite! She has heard my prayer!”</p>
<p>Her little hands ventured to reach out for his head and take it by
the temples. Around them was the solitude of the Ethiopian night; from
out of the forests the flowers filled the air with incense; a
spice-laden aroma was wafted from the sea; and the radiant stars hung
above them, like white suns, with the dazzling glory that was
Sirius.... <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb256" id="pb256" class="pginternal">256</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch27"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3282">Chapter XXVII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Cape Dire! The sea was reached; and there rose the
obelisks, the shafts, the pillars of Sesostris, whose sacred writings
immortalized the remembrance of the passage of the Egyptian world-ruler
who for nine years had linked conquest to conquest, even to Arabia,
even to Bactriana, even to India. And Caleb approached Lucius with a
smile and said:</p>
<p>“Most noble lord, I wished to keep it for you as a surprise
and would not tell you before, but this little diversorium at Cape
Dire, overlooking my beloved native land, belongs to <i>us</i>, to
Ghizla and me, and is a small branch of our great Hermes House at
Alexandria; and to-night you need no longer sleep in a tent, but will
have a worthy apartment and sleep on a soft couch of skins. For, though
you are still without your own furniture and your sumptuous utensils
and treasures of art and though this little guest-house is not to be
compared with our big diversorium, it is nevertheless comfortable and
clean and it has bathrooms and kitchens <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb257" id="pb257" class="pginternal">257</a>]</span>and we built it here
for the accommodation of any noble lords who travel from Alexandria to
the pillars of Sesostris or from the pillars of Sesostris to
Alexandria.”</p>
<p>And Caleb, swaggering gaily and elegantly on the tips of his red
boots, led the travellers into his guest-house; and Lucius, for the
first time for weeks, bathed not in a rustling stream but in a
bathroom, where his slaves rubbed and kneaded his body.</p>
<p>Caleb stood on the cape, with his hand above his eyes, and looked
out in astonishment. He was surprised that the quadrireme, with Uncle
Catullus on board, had not arrived from the Gulf of Acathantus, nay,
was not even in sight. Could there have been an accident? He told his
fears to no one but Thrasyllus; and the two stood looking long on the
point of Cape Dire, gazing into the distance, each with his hand above
his eyes.</p>
<p>But at last, when night began to fall, the great, graceful
sea-monster appeared on the horizon, with her prow erect like a
swan’s neck and her hundreds of slender legs moving in unison;
and the rose-yellow sails bellied in the breeze; and the silver statue
of Aphrodite shot forth its silver spark of light; and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb258" id="pb258" class="pginternal">258</a>]</span>the
rowers’ long, melancholy chant, the soft, monotonous
accompaniment of tiring work, was borne long and wistfully over the
sea, together with the cheerful song of the sailors. And the
travellers, who now all stood on the cape waiting for the ship, saw the
figures of Uncle Catullus, of the stewards Vettius and Rufus, of the
master and the steersman.</p>
<p>And they waved again and again; and Cora, with her harp pressed to
her bosom, sang the song of welcome to the ship; and her voice sounded
jubilant and clear, full of happiness and full of gladness. The ropes
were flung ashore, the ship lay moored....</p>
<p>But what was the anxiety that covered the faces of all on board, who
were now preparing to walk across the gangway to the jetty? Why did
Uncle Catullus lift his hands on high and shake his head, pinned round
so comically in his travelling-veil? And what was it that Vettius and
Rufus were saying to each other with much gesticulation and why did
they now all land with such embarrassed faces?</p>
<p>“Well, Lucius,” said Uncle Catullus, embracing him,
“you’re looking splendid, my dear fellow, splendid, brown
and bronzed as a Nimrod; and your arms feel hard and <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb259" id="pb259" class="pginternal">259</a>]</span>your
eyes are bright and your mouth is laughing happily and you look very
different from what you were when we left Baiæ.... Ah, my dear,
dear Lucius! Fortune is blind and fate is a riddle and we poor mortals
are the playthings of the cruel gods; and we never know, in the midst
of our delight and gladness, what is hanging over our heads ...
especially when travelling, dear boy: my dear boy, <i>especially</i>
when travelling!”</p>
<p>“But why especially when travelling, my dear uncle?”
asked Lucius, laughing.</p>
<p>And he led his uncle into the diversorium; and his uncle was now
weeping; and his slaves unpinned his travelling-veil for him and
relieved him of his travelling-cloak; and Vettius and Rufus also looked
so strange and so gloomy and solemn; and it was as though the air were
filled with dread.</p>
<p>“But, Uncle Catullus,” said Lucius, “what has
happened?”</p>
<p>“My dear, dear boy,” Uncle Catullus kept on tediously
repeating, “I ... I really can <i>not</i> tell you.”</p>
<p>And he wrung his hands and wept; and Thrasyllus turned pale and Cora
turned pale and Rufus looked gloomy.</p>
<p>“No,” repeated Uncle Catullus, “I really
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb260" id="pb260" class="pginternal">260</a>]</span>can <i>not</i> tell Lucius. You tell him,
Vettius, you tell him.”</p>
<p>“My Lord Catullus,” said Vettius, at last, in despair,
“how <i>can</i> I tell my Lord Lucius? If I do, he will fly into
a passion and kill me; but, perhaps, if Rufus will tell him
...”</p>
<p>“I will not, I will <i>not</i>,” said Rufus, warding off
the suggestion with both hands. “By all the gods, Vettius, I will
<i>not</i> tell him.”</p>
<p>“Nor will I,” said Uncle Catullus, moaning and
weeping.</p>
<p>Lucius now knitted his brows and said:</p>
<p>“But I must know, Vettius. I order you to tell me what has
happened—for something has happened—I order you to tell me
and I swear not to kill you.... Has it to do with the quadrireme, a
mutiny among the rowers?”</p>
<p>“Worse than that, my lord!” wailed Vettius.</p>
<p>“Has there been a theft of our baggage or jewels or
plate?”</p>
<p>“Worse, my lord, much worse!”</p>
<p>“Has there been a fire at our insula in Rome? Is the villa
burned down?”</p>
<p>“Worse, worse, my lord!” Vettius and Rufus now cried in
chorus.</p>
<p>And they flung themselves at Lucius’ feet <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb261" id="pb261" class="pginternal">261</a>]</span>and
embraced his knees; and Uncle Catullus fell sobbing on
Thrasyllus’ breast.</p>
<p>“But what <i>is</i> it? By all the gods, speak up!”
cried Lucius, in a fury. “What <i>is</i> it? Speak up, or I will
have you whipped till you do!”</p>
<p>“We will tell you, my lord!” Vettius and Rufus now
cried.</p>
<p>And Uncle Catullus cried:</p>
<p>“Yes, tell him, tell him; after all, he <i>must</i> be
told.”</p>
<p>“Are we alone, my lord?” whined Vettius. “Are
there no slaves listening at the doors and is Caleb out of
hearing?”</p>
<p>Cora opened the doors and peeped out:</p>
<p>“There is no one there,” she said. “I will
withdraw, my lord.”</p>
<p>“No, stay,” commanded Lucius.</p>
<p>She stayed.</p>
<p>“Speak up,” Lucius commanded Vettius, lifting him
up.</p>
<p>“My lord,” said Vettius, again falling at Lucius’
feet, “if I must tell you, let me do so on my knees. For I have
not the strength left to tell you, my lord, if I stand face to face
with your anger.”</p>
<p>“Speak!” roared Lucius, in a voice of thunder.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb262" id="pb262" class="pginternal">262</a>]</span></p>
<p>“My lord,” said Vettius, at last, clasping Lucius’
knees in his hands and kissing them continually, “my lord, our
gracious emperor, Augustus Tiberius, is wroth with you, we know not for
what reason, and....”</p>
<p>“Well?” shouted Lucius.</p>
<p>“And he has confiscated all your possessions, O my lord,
everything that you possess: all your insula in Rome, your villa, your
estates and domains, your horses and chariots and cattle, your slaves
and treasures of art, your library and your jewels ... and has attached
all the sums which you had lodged with your bankers and money-changers
in various towns! You are penniless, my lord, for you own nothing
except what your ship contains; and, if I had not succeeded in keeping
Tiberius’ displeasure secret by means of a precipitate flight and
by continuing to drift about in the Great Sea and the Arabian Gulf,
your quadrireme also would have been seized at Alexandria and you would
now have been without your ship, without your rowers, without your
slaves, without a single penny. By bribing the authorities at Pelusium
with the money that remained in my hands, I managed secretly to pass
through the Nechao Canal to <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb263" id="pb263" class="pginternal">263</a>]</span>Arsinoe; and at Berenice we met
your Uncle Catullus and informed him of the terrible news. My lord, do
not slay me and do not be wroth with me, for I have saved for you what
I could!”</p>
<p>And Vettius writhed at Lucius’ feet and sobbed; and they all
sobbed: Uncle Catullus, Thrasyllus, Rufus and Cora....</p>
<p>And Caleb, who had been listening at the door, turned very pale.</p>
<p>For there was still a long, long, long papyrus scroll of a bill
awaiting payment, for the big hunts in the Ethiopian forests!
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb264" id="pb264" class="pginternal">264</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch28"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3419">Chapter XXVIII</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Caleb was pale when he appeared before Lucius, who had
sent for him.</p>
<p>“Caleb,” said Lucius, “perhaps you already know
...”</p>
<p>“I know nothing, my lord,” said Caleb.</p>
<p>“I am penniless, Caleb. The Emperor Tiberius has confiscated
all my possessions; and even my title to the quadrireme is
questionable.”</p>
<p>“O my lord, O my lord!” Caleb began to lament. “O
my poor, poor, noble lord! What a terrible fate to befall you! If only
you had consented faithfully to wear the Sabæan amulets! O my
poor, poor, noble lord! What will you do now? You, who always lived in
the lap of luxury! And now! How now? Alas, my poor, poor, noble lord
and alas, poor, poor Caleb! For who, my lord, my poor, poor noble lord,
will now pay my bill?”</p>
<p>And, wailing and lamenting and shaking his head and weeping, Caleb
unfurled the long, long, long papyrus scroll of his bill, which
uncoiled itself from his quivering <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb265" id="pb265" class="pginternal">265</a>]</span>fingers right down to the
floor, like a rustling snake.</p>
<p>“We’ll look into your bill at once, Caleb,” said
Lucius, encouragingly. “Call the stewards and Thrasyllus to
me.”</p>
<p>They came and examined the bill and shook their heads and thought
the expenses of the great Ethiopian hunt terribly high; but Caleb swore
that, because of his growing affection for Lucius, he had charged less
than he did to other noble lords:</p>
<p>“But there is a solution, my lord,” said Caleb, drawing
Lucius aside. And he continued, “My lord, if you will make over
Cora to me ... I will write off all the expenses of the Ethiopian
hunt.”</p>
<p>“Caleb,” said Lucius, earnestly, “I know that you
are fond of Cora. But I also am very fond of her, Caleb, and I mean to
keep her as my only treasure.”</p>
<p>A loud sob came from a corner of the room. And Lucius, turning
round, saw Tarrar sitting on the floor, looking profoundly
dejected.</p>
<p>“And me, my lord?” sobbed Tarrar. “Won’t you
keep <i>me</i> as your little slave, my lord?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb266" id="pb266" class="pginternal">266</a>]</span></p>
<p>Lucius smiled and laid his hand on Tarrar’s woolly head:</p>
<p>“I am not forgetting you either, Tarrar,” he said,
“and I shall keep you too. But, for the rest, Caleb, I shall have
to sell the ship and all my slaves and anything that remains to me. I
have some money as well, however, and I will try to pay you in full.
But Cora shall not appear on the bill.”</p>
<p>“Alas, my lord, this is an evil day and the end of the world
is certainly near at hand, notwithstanding that I can see the blue
coast of my dear Saba! I, like yourself, am losing everything: the hope
of getting Cora, who loves you even as you love her, and the hope of
getting my poor money!”</p>
<p>“Come, Caleb, we must not repine. Let us just count the money
that remains to us.”</p>
<p>The stewards laid rows of gold coins on the table. And Caleb’s
bill, despite the length which his papyrus scroll covered on the floor,
was paid and receipted, after some quibbling between the stewards, who
took exception to certain items, and Caleb, who was quite amenable to
reason. And, when the money had been transferred to the purse which
wound like a fat snake round Caleb’s <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb267" id="pb267" class="pginternal">267</a>]</span>waist, he became cheerful again and said:</p>
<p>“My lord, my noble lord, for you are still a noble lord,
listen to me. I am profoundly miserable that I can’t have Cora.
Yes, my lord, really, I am profoundly miserable. But I am an honest
fellow and at the same time I am a man of business. Listen, my lord,
and let your stewards listen and your trusty Thrasyllus too. Listen, my
lord. You wish to sell the quadrireme with all her contents. But where,
my lord? It can’t be done at Alexandria, for any property of
yours would be seized at once. Here, at Cape Dire, oh, there are only
uncivilized Macrobii and no noble lords who could afford to buy the
quadrireme! Listen, my lord, listen. Do you with all these your
servants, free men and witnesses, sign a certificate, oh, my ever noble
lord, a certificate ... dare I say it?”</p>
<p>“Speak out, Caleb!”</p>
<p>“A certificate that the quadrireme, with her rowers and all
her contents, belongs to me; and I swear by the gods of Sabæa and
of Egypt, by the eyes of Cora, whom I love, by the friendship which I,
my lord, your guide and companion in the chase, venture to cherish for
you, I swear, my lord, that I <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb268" id="pb268" class="pginternal">268</a>]</span>will myself endeavour to
dispose of the quadrireme to a noble lord and pay you honestly, to the
last penny, after deducting my expenses!”</p>
<p>Thus spoke Caleb; and he stood up in the exalted attitude in which
he had taken his oath, with his eyes and hands raised to heaven, and
waited.</p>
<p>Vettius and Rufus thought it rather risky, but Lucius said:</p>
<p>“Caleb’s advice is excellent. It is the only thing to
do. If I delay, Tiberius’ minions will discover where I am and
take the last remnant of my belongings from me. Caleb, I will do as you
say. I will sign the document certifying that the ship is your
property, together with the slaves, the rowers, the furniture, the
jewels, the very valuable plate....”</p>
<p>But Caleb did not move. He continued to stand in the solemn, rapt
attitude of his oath, with his eyes and hands raised to heaven. And he
now said, slowly:</p>
<p>“I thank you, my lord, for your confidence. It will certainly
not be abused. If I do not render you an equitable account in whatever
place of exile you may be, may the awful jaws of Typhon, whose tongue
is a <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb269" id="pb269" class="pginternal">269</a>]</span>serpent and whose teeth are blazing flames,
swallow me and devour me!”</p>
<p>And Caleb himself trembled at his terrific oath and then fell on his
knees before Lucius—a thing which he, a free Sabæan, had
never yet done—and kissed the foot of the suddenly impoverished
noble lord! <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb270" id="pb270" class="pginternal">270</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="ch29"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3490">Chapter XXIX</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first">Near the pillars of Sesostris, near the little
diversorium, there lay moored, beside the quadrireme, a merchant
trireme, which was sailing past Ophir to the Persian Gulf and which was
to go up the Euphrates to Babylon. And Lucius asked to speak to the
master and said:</p>
<p>“Master, can I have room in your ship for myself, my father,
my young wife and my little black slave? I am a sculptor; and I am on
my way to Babylon.”</p>
<p>And he pointed to Thrasyllus, Cora and Tarrar, who approached, each
carrying a small bundle of luggage.</p>
<p>“Certainly,” said the master. “My one cabin is
still unoccupied. It is small and perhaps inconvenient; but people like
you, who are sculptors, are not accustomed to luxury, I dare say, and
will be prepared to make shift.”</p>
<p>Lucius answered that, if the cabin was suitable for his wife and his
father, he and the little slave would do the best they could on the
half-deck or in the hold; and he <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb271" id="pb271" class="pginternal">271</a>]</span>beckoned to his family to
come on board and paid the passage-money.</p>
<p>For Caleb had advanced him a goodly sum on the value of the
quadrireme, for the immediate needs of the voyage; and Caleb himself
had set out, with a great following, for his dear Saba, first because
he wanted to forget his love-sickness in the pleasures of Arabia Felix
and then to make a start by selling many of Lucius’ slaves and
jewels, his ornaments and furniture at Mariaba, the capital, because it
was safer to get this done as quickly as possible. The sale of the
great ship herself would be difficult enough.</p>
<p>Uncle Catullus remained on board of her. He did not wish to be a
burden on his poor nephew Lucius; he had contrived to hoard a modest
capital with one gold piece after another that had accidentally slipped
through Lucius’ fingers; and he was to sail to Alexandria in the
ship, after she had been sold, and there, in the city of the finest
cooking, to spend his old age in a small apartment in the Hermes House.
And so he had taken a tearful leave of Lucius, Thrasyllus and Cora and
had said to her:</p>
<p>“Dear Cora, just as you were going to call me uncle, we part
and perhaps for ever. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb272" id="pb272" class="pginternal">272</a>]</span>Ah, Egypt is the death of me!
Egypt will irrevocably be the death of me! For I can never go back to
Rome, poor old exile that I am, because Tiberius—may he die a
thousand deaths!—would rob me of my few pence even as he has
robbed Lucius of his treasures....”</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>The merchant trireme glided away over a smooth sea; and the
travellers on the deck waved farewell to Uncle Catullus, who stood on
the prow and waved back. It was a leave-taking for good. And the master
asked, inquisitively:</p>
<p>“Is that lord, who stands waving his hand to you, the owner of
that splendid vessel?”</p>
<p>“Yes, master,” Lucius lied, “and he’s my
uncle. And one day I shall be his heir.”</p>
<p>“Then you will do well to hold him in honour, sir,” said
the master, growing very respectful. “Whew! That’s a
prospect not to be sneezed at! What a noble ship! What a magnificent
quadrireme! But tell me, master,” he continued, more and more
inquisitively, “in that case why don’t you <i>stay</i> with
your uncle?” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb273" id="pb273" class="pginternal">273</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Because it’s not a good thing, master, for poor
relations to be always hanging round the rich. For then you only annoy
them and they end by cutting you off with a shilling. And that is why,
master,” said Lucius, pressing Cora, by his side, to him
“after seeing and admiring Egypt at my rich uncle’s
expense, I am now paying a visit to Babylon with my father, my wife and
my little slave. From there we shall go through Assyria and Asia Minor
to the island of Cos, where my wife was born and where I want to settle
down as a sculptor.”</p>
<p>The master thought this very natural; and, as the wind was now
blowing a stiff breeze, with the first cold, autumnal gusts, Lucius,
happy, gay and healthy, led Cora into her cabin, while Tarrar squatted
outside, like a faithful, clever little monkey, and Thrasyllus, within,
carefully rolled up the maps, books and itineraries which he had
consulted during their tour. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb274" id="pb274" class="pginternal">274</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1" id="postscript"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main" id="xd20e3534">Postscript.</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="first"><i>Caleb of Mariaba (Saba), joint proprietor of the
Great Diversorium, the Hermes House, at Alexandria, near the Canopian
Gate, to the ever noble Lord Publius Lucius Sabinus, sculptor, at
Cos.</i></p>
<p>“<i>Written at Alexandria, at the second hour of the
fourteenth day of the month of Pacothi, in the ninth year of the
benevolent reign of our gracious Emperor Tiberius Augustus.</i></p>
<p class="salute">“<span class="sc">My ever noble Lord,
greeting!</span></p>
<p>“It is a pleasure to me, Caleb of Mariaba, to inform you by
this letter, entrusted to Alexandros of Alexandria, master of the
merchant trireme <i>Berenice</i>, that by chance and great good fortune
I have succeeded in disposing of the valuable quadrireme, the
pleasure-ship <i>Aphrodite</i>, once your property, noble lord, and in
the presence of witnesses, free men, transferred to me at Cape Dire,
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb275" id="pb275" class="pginternal">275</a>]</span>by the Pillars of Sesostris<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd20e3560" id="xd20e3560src">1</a> ...
selling her at Arsinoe, previous to the passage through the Nechao
Canal (which would probably have been liable to legal objections), at
the very profitable price (as, considering all the circumstances, it
appears to me, your most obedient, humble servant, friend, guide and
companion in the chase) of (after deducting my commission and all my
expenses) 900,000 (say, nine hundred thousand) sesterces, a sum
reckoned according to the Roman value, item that noble quadrireme
<i>Aphrodite</i> and three hundred rowers (slaves), item all the
necessary and most complete equipment, item costly furniture, carpets,
plate and treasures of art, which would probably have produced large
sums had it been possible to sell them separately, without danger of
seizure in the name of our gracious Emperor Tiberius Augustus, but the
separate sale of which would, in the circumstances aforesaid, have
entailed innumerable drawbacks;</p>
<p>“Whereas I, Caleb of Mariaba, acting and appearing on my own
behalf, as actual owner of the noble quadrireme <i>Aphrodite</i>, have
been able to sell this magnificent pleasure-ship to the noble Lord
Baabab, a Persian satrap, residing at Susa; <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb276" id="pb276" class="pginternal">276</a>]</span></p>
<p>“Wishing, my noble Lord Lucius, companion of the chase and
friend, to act to your ever noble advantage, I propose, in order to
reduce to a minimum all risks of shipwreck and piracy and other fatal
accidents (such as a jealous fate keeps ever hanging over the heads of
us poor mortals), to remit to you at frequent intervals, by the
intermediary of a master of merchant-vessels, one trusted by all and
personally known to myself and sailing to and fro between Alexandria
and the Archipelago, a small sum in gold coin or bar, with account and
settlement, so that you, my noble lord, may at the earliest moment
possess your whole capital in your own hands.</p>
<p>“And I also send you, in memory of your most beautiful ship, a
few pieces of furniture and valuables (withheld and smuggled away),
including two bronze bedsteads, a citron-wood table, a Babylonian
carpet, some Ethiopian ostrich-feather coverings, the silver statue of
Aphrodite, patroness of your ship, and a few minor trifles of taste and
convenience.</p>
<p>“I take advantage of the opportunity, my noble lord, dear
friend and stout companion <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb277" id="pb277" class="pginternal">277</a>]</span>of the chase, to tell you that at
Mariaba, during a temporary stay in my beloved country, Sabæa, I
bought myself a most beautiful slave, a Greek like Cora and excelling
in many gifts, which slave, in order to bind her with greater certainty
to my affection, I set free at Mariaba, leaving her, however, as my
wife in my house in that city, where I hope one day, after achieving my
fortune, to enjoy a life of bliss, fearing lest my brother Ghizla might
allow his rights on her to prevail (according to the manners of our
country) and hoping to visit her each time that my conduct of noble
lords shall bring me to the pillars of Sesostris, from which my beloved
country is easily reached.</p>
<p>“Wishing you, my noble lord and friend and companion of the
chase, the blessing of the gods upon your house, upon your new work and
your household, upon your wife and your servants, the wise Thrasyllus
and the faithful Tarrar, together with an always possible change of
fortune, I bow low before you, in all humility and friendship, with one
hand on my heart and one hand on my lips.</p>
<p><span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd20e3583">“</span>Your ever most obedient, humble servant
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#pb278" id="pb278" class="pginternal">278</a>]</span>and guide and friend and companion of the
chase,</p>
<p>“<span class="sc">Caleb</span> of Mariaba (Saba), joint
proprietor of the Great Diversorium, the Hermes House, at Alexandria,
near the Canopian Gate.”</p>
